Second Edition
Core Rulebook
Logan Bonner, Jason Bulmahn,
Stephen Radney-MacFarland, and Mark Seifter
CORE RULEBOOK
2 3
Paizo Inc.
7120 185th Ave NE, Ste 120
Redmond, WA 98052-0577
paizo.com
Table of Contents
1 Introduction 4
Learn the basics of roleplaying games, get an overview of the rules, and see an example
of play. This section also covers how to build a character, as well as how to level up your
character after adventuring.
2 Ancestries & Backgrounds 32
Choose the people your character belongs to—whether they’re dwarves, elves, gnomes,
goblins, halflings, or humans—then pick a background that fleshes out what your character
did before becoming an adventurer. Details on languages also appear in this chapter.
3 Classes 66
Bold fighters, devout clerics, scholarly wizards, and inventive alchemists are just a few of
the 12 character classes you can select from. This chapter also details animal companions,
familiars, and multiclass archetypes that expand your character’s abilities.
4 Skills 232
Execute acrobatic maneuvers, trick your enemies, tend to an ally’s wounds, or learn all about
strange creatures and magic using your training in skills.
5 Feats 254
Expand your capabilities by selecting general feats that improve your statistics or give you
new actions. This chapter includes skill feats, which are tied directly to your skills.
6 Equipment 270
Gear up for adventure with this vast arsenal of armor, weapons, and gear.
7 Spells 296
Learn to kindle magic in the palm of your hand. This section includes the rules for spellcasting,
hundreds of spell descriptions, focus spells used by certain classes, and rituals.
GAME DESIGNERS
Logan Bonner, Jason Bulmahn,
Stephen Radney-MacFarland, and Mark Seifter
ADDITIONAL WRITING
James Jacobs
DEVELOPERS
Adam Daigle, Lyz Liddell, and Erik Mona
EDITORS
Amirali Attar Olyaee, Judy Bauer,
Christopher Paul Carey, James Case, Jaym Gates,
Leo Glass, Jason Keeley, Avi Kool, Lyz Liddell,
Luis Loza, Erik Mona, Adrian Ng, Lacy Pellazar,
Elsa Sjunneson-Henry, and Jason Tondro
COVER ARTIST
Wayne Reynolds
INTERIOR ARTISTS
Giorgio Baroni, Rogier van de Beek,
Yanis Cardin, Sergio Cosmai, Biagio D’Alessandro,
Michele Esposito, Giorgio Falconi, Taylor Fischer,
Mariusz Gandzel, Igor Grechanyi, Hai Hoang,
Roman Roland Kuteynikov, Setiawan Lie,
Valeria Lutfullina, Damien Mammoliti, Rob McCaleb,
Andrea Tentori Montalto, Stefano Moroni,
Federico Musetti, Alexander Nanitchkov,
Mirco Paganessi, Mary Jane Pajaron,
Jose Parodi, Angelo Peluso, Roberto Pitturru,
Konstantin Porubov, Wayne Reynolds,
Kiki Moch Rizky, Riccardo Rullo, Bryan Sola,
Matteo Spirito, Matias Tapia, Ben Wootten, and
Sam Yang
ART DIRECTION AND GRAPHIC DESIGN
Sarah E. Robinson and Sonja Morris
CREATIVE DIRECTOR
James Jacobs
PUBLISHER
Erik Mona
SPECIAL THANKS
Dave Arneson, Monte Cook, Ron Edwards,
Gary Gygax, Daniel Solis, John Stavropoulos,
Jonathan Tweet, Skip Williams, and all the
participants in the Pathfinder Playtest
5 7 11
CORE RULEBOOK
8 The Age of Lost Omens 416
Discover the world of Golarion. In the Age of Lost Omens, you can delve into the secrets
of ancient empires and claim your own heroic destiny.
9 Playing the Game 442
Read up on comprehensive rules for playing the game,
using actions, and calculating your statistics. This includes
rules on encounters, exploration, and downtime, as well as
everything you need for combat.
10 Game Mastering 482
Prepare and run your games with the advice in this section.
Rules for setting Difficulty Classes, granting rewards,
environments, and hazards can also be found here.
11 Crafting & Treasure 530
Award treasure, from magic weapons to alchemical compounds and
transforming statues. The rules for activating and wearing alchemical and
magical items are found here as well.
Conditions Appendix 618
Read up on conditions, from dying to slowed to frightened. These rules cover common
benefits and drawbacks that typically come from spells or special actions.
Character Sheet 624
Glossary and Index 628
Quickly find the rules you need in a combined rules glossary and book index.
Core Rulebook
4
Introduction 1
5
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
With a haunting moan, shambling bodies rose up from the forgotten
battlefield. Given foul unlife by the necromancy of the Whispering
Tyrant, the corpses still wore the tattered raiment of their former
lives. These crusaders had been the first to stand against the lich
when he returned, and they were the first to fall in his rebirth.
“Aroden is dead!” Valeros spat out the dead god’s name like a
curse as he drew his sword and readied his battered shield. “He’s
not coming back to save us this time.” Kyra and Merisiel shared his
sentiment. The Whispering Tyrant was back, and it was up to them
to return the lich to his grave.
As Kyra strode up beside Valeros, blade in hand, she called out a
prayer to her goddess. Sarenrae’s light would guide and fortify her
against the coming darkness, but there would be no direct divine
intervention in this war. Victory would be bought with the sweat and
blood of mortals, and both the brave and the innocent would give
their lives.
Merisiel nodded to the others, a look of determination upon her
face. Quickly scanning the horde, she found her first target and let fly
a small blade. It sank to the hilt in the rotting eye socket of one of the
dead crusaders, but while the foul creature staggered back, it did not
fall. Unfazed, she drew another dagger and prepared to throw again.
Provoked by the attack, the undead advanced as one, a wave of
rotting flesh and clattering bone that descended on the heroes…
Core Rulebook
6
Pathfinder adventures take place in the Age of Lost Omens, a perilous fantasy world
rife with ancient empires; sprawling city-states; and countless tombs, dungeons, and
monster lairs packed with plunder. A Pathfinder character’s adventures might take them
to forsaken underwater ruins, haunted gothic crypts, or magical universities in jungle
cities. A world of endless adventure awaits!
What Is a Roleplaying Game?
A roleplaying game is an interactive story where one player, the Game Master (GM), sets
the scene and presents challenges, while other players take the roles of player characters
(PCs) and attempt to overcome those challenges. Danger comes in the form of monsters,
devious traps, and the machinations of adversarial agents, but Pathfinder also provides
political schemes, puzzles, interpersonal drama, and much, much more.
The game is typically played in a group of four to seven players, with one of those
players serving as the group’s Game Master. The GM prepares, presents, and presides
over the game’s world and story, posing challenges and playing adversaries, allies, and
bystanders alike. As each scene leads into the next, each player contributes to the story,
responding to situations according to the personality and abilities of their character.
Dice rolls, combined with preassigned statistics, add an element of chance and determine
whether characters succeed or fail at actions they attempt.
The Flow of the Game
Pathfinder is played in sessions, during which players gather in person or online for a few
hours to play the game. A complete Pathfinder story can be as short as a single session,
commonly referred to as a “one-shot,” or it can stretch on for multiple sessions, forming
a campaign that might last for months or even years. If the Game Master enjoys telling
the story and the players are entertained, the game can go as long as you like.
A session can be mostly action, with battles with vile beasts, escapes from fiendish
traps, and the completion of heroic quests. Alternatively, it could include negotiating with
a baron for rights to a fort, infiltrating an army of lumbering frost giants, or bargaining
with an angel for a strand of hair required for an elixir to revive a slain friend. Ultimately
it’s up to you and your group to determine what kind of game you are playing, from
dungeon exploration to a nuanced political drama, or anything in between.
The Players
Everyone involved in a Pathfinder game is a player, including the Game Master, but for
the sake of simplicity, “player” usually refers to participants other than the GM. Before
the game begins, players invent a history and personality for their characters, using
the rules to determine their characters’ statistics, abilities, strengths, and weaknesses.
The GM might limit the options available during character creation, but the limits are
discussed ahead of time so everyone can create interesting heroes. In general, the only
limits to character concepts are the players’ imaginations and the GM’s guidelines.
During the game, players describe the actions their characters take and roll dice, using
their characters’ abilities. The GM resolves the outcome of these actions. Some players
enjoy acting out (or roleplaying) what they do as if they were their characters, while
others describe their characters’ actions as if narrating a story. Do whatever feels best!
If this is your first experience with a roleplaying game, it is recommended that
you take on the role of a player to familiarize yourself with the rules and the world.
THE FIRST RULE
The first rule of Pathfinder is
that this game is yours. Use
it to tell the stories you want
to tell, be the character you
want to be, and share exciting
adventures with friends. If
any other rule gets in the way
of your fun, as long as your
group agrees, you can alter or
ignore it to fit your story. The
true goal of Pathfinder is for
everyone to enjoy themselves.
DICE
Pathfinder requires a set
of polyhedral dice. Each
die has a different number
of sides—four, six, eight, or
more. When these dice are
mentioned in the text, they’re
indicated by a “d” followed by
the number of sides on the
die. Pathfinder uses 4-sided
dice (or d4), 6-sided dice (d6),
8-sided dice (d8), 10-sided dice
(d10), 12-sided dice (d12), and
20-sided dice (d20). If you
need to roll multiple dice, a
number before the “d” tells you
how many. For example, “4d6”
means you should roll four
dice, all 6-sided. If a rule asks
for d%, you generate a number
from 1 to 100 by rolling two
10-sided dice, treating one as
the tens place and the other as
the ones place.
Chapter 1: Introduction
Pathfinder is a fantasy tabletop roleplaying game (RPG) where you and a group of friends
gather to tell a tale of brave heroes and cunning villains in a world filled with terrifying
monsters and amazing treasures. More importantly, Pathfinder is a game where your
character’s choices determine how the story unfolds.
Introduction 1
7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
The Game Master
While the other players create and control their characters,
the Game Master (or GM) is in charge of the story
and world. The GM describes all the situations player
characters experience in an adventure, considers how the
actions of player characters affect the story, and interprets
the rules along the way.
The GM can create a new adventure—crafting a narrative,
selecting monsters, and assigning treasure on their own—
or they can instead rely on a published adventure, using
it as a basis for the session and modifying it as needed to
accommodate their individual players and the group’s style
of play. Some even run games that combine original and
published content, mixed together to form a new narrative.
Being the GM is a challenge, requiring you to adjudicate
the rules, narrate the story, and juggle other responsibilities.
But it can also be very rewarding and worth all the work
required to run a good game. If it is your first time running
a game, remember that the only thing that matters is that
everyone has a good time, and that includes you. Everything
else will come naturally with practice and patience.
Gaming Is for All
Whether you are the GM or a player, participating in a
tabletop roleplaying game includes a social contract:
everyone has gathered together to have fun telling a story.
For many, roleplaying is a way to escape the troubles of
everyday life. Be mindful of everyone at the table and what
they want out of the game, so that everyone can have fun.
When a group gathers for the first time, they should talk
about what they hope to experience at the table, as well as
any topics they want to avoid. Everyone should understand
that elements might come up that make some players feel
uncomfortable or even unwelcome, and everyone should
agree to respect those boundaries during play. That way,
everyone can enjoy the game together.
Pathfinder is a game for everyone, regardless of their age,
gender, race or ethnicity, religion, sexual orientation, or any
other identities and life experiences. It is the responsibility
of all of the players, not just the GM, to make sure the
table is fun and welcoming to all.
Tools of Play
In addition to this book, there are a few things you will
need to play Pathfinder. These supplies can be found at
your local hobby shop or online at paizo.com.
Character Sheet: Each player will need a character sheet
to create their character and to record what happens to
that character during play. You can find a character sheet
in the back of this book and online as a free pdf.
Dice: The players and GM will need at least one set of
polyhedral dice, although most participants bring their
own. Six-sided dice are quite common, but all the dice in
the set can be found at hobby game stores or online. See
the Dice sidebar on page 7 for more on the different kinds
of dice and how they are discussed in the text.
Adventure: Every table needs an adventure to play,
whether it’s designed by the GM or found in a published
resource. You can find a variety of exciting adventures
and even entire Adventure Path campaigns at paizo.com.
Bestiary: From terrifying dragons to mischievous
gremlins, monsters are a common threat that the PCs
might face, and each type has its own statistics and
abilities. These can be found in the Pathfinder Bestiary, an
absolutely invaluable book for GMs. Monster statistics
can also be found online for free at paizo.com/prd.
Maps and Miniatures: The chaos of combat can be
difficult to imagine, so many groups use maps to represent
the battlefield. These maps are marked with a 1-inch grid,
and each square represents 5 feet in the game. Miniatures
and illustrated tokens called pawns are used to represent
the characters and the adversaries they face.
Additional Accessories: There are a number of
additional accessories you can add to your game to
enhance the experience, including tools that help you
track turns in combat, decks of cards for referencing
common rules, digital character-creation tools, and even
background music and sound-effect sets.
Basics of Play
Before creating your first character or adventure, you
should understand a number of basic concepts used in
the game. New concepts are presented in bold to make
them easy to find, but this chapter is only an introduction
to the basics of play. The complete game rules are defined
in later chapters, and the Glossary and Index in the back
of this book will help you find specific rules you need.
Defining Characters
In Pathfinder, the players take on the role of player
characters (PCs), while the Game Master portrays
nonplayer characters (NPCs) and monsters. While PCs
and NPCs are both important to the story, they serve very
different purposes in the game. PCs are the protagonists—
the narrative is about them—while NPCs and monsters
are allies, contacts, adversaries, and villains. That said,
PCs, NPCs, and monsters share several characteristics.
Level is one of the most important statistics of the game,
as it conveys the approximate power and capabilities of
every individual creature. PCs range in level from 1st, at
the start of the character’s adventuring career, to 20th,
the very height of power. As the characters overcome
challenges, defeat foes, and complete adventures, they
accumulate Experience Points (XP). Every time a character
amasses 1,000 XP, they go up a level, gaining new abilities
so they can take on even greater challenges. A 1st-level PC
might face off against a giant rat or a group of bandits, but
at 20th level, that same character might be able to bring
ruin to an entire city with a single spell.
In addition to level, characters are defined by ability
scores, which measure a character’s raw potential and are
Core Rulebook
8
THE WORLD AS A
PARTICIPANT
Aside from characters and
monsters, the world of
Pathfinder itself can be a
force at the table and in
the narrative. While the
presence of the larger world
can sometimes be an obvious
hazard, such as when a
powerful storm lashes the
countryside, the world can
also act in subtle, small ways.
Traps and treasures are just
as important in many tales
as cunning beasts. To help
you understand these game
elements, many of them use
the same characteristics as
characters and monsters. For
example, most environmental
hazards have a level, which
indicates how dangerous they
are, and the level of a magic
item gives you a sense of its
overall power and impact on
a story.
used to calculate most of their other statistics. There are six ability scores in the game.
Strength represents a character’s physical might, while Dexterity represents agility
and the ability to avoid danger. Constitution indicates a character’s overall health and
well-being. Intelligence represents raw knowledge and problem-solving ability, while
Wisdom measures a character’s insight and the ability to evaluate a situation. Finally,
Charisma indicates charm, persuasiveness, and force of personality. Ability scores for
ordinary folk range from as low as 3 to as high as 18, with 10 representing average
human capabilities. High-level characters can have ability scores that range much
higher than 18.
An ability score that’s above the average increases your chance of success at tasks
related to the ability score, while those below the average decrease your chance. This
adjustment is called an ability modifier.
Your player character is also defined by some key choices you make. The first choice
is a PC’s ancestry, representing the character’s parents and heritage, such as human,
elf, or goblin. Next up is the PC’s background, which describes their upbringing, from
lowly street urchin to wealthy noble. Finally, and most importantly, a PC’s class defines
the majority of their aptitudes and abilities, like a wizard’s command of powerful
arcane spells or a druid’s power to transform into a fearsome beast!
In addition to these key choices, player characters also have a number of feats—
individual abilities selected during character creation and as the character increases
in level. Every feat has a type to denote where its explanation can be found (for
example, elf feats can be found in the elf ancestry) and its theme (wizard feats, for
example, grant abilities that deal with spells). Finally, characters have skills that
measure their ability to hide, swim, bargain, and perform other common tasks.
Creating a Narrative
Characters and their choices create the story of Pathfinder, but how they interact
with each other and the world around them is governed by rules. So, while you might
decide that your character undertakes an epic journey to overcome terrifying foes
and make the world a safer place, your character’s chance of success is determined
by their abilities, the choices you make, and the roll of the dice.
The GM determines the premise and background of most adventures, although
character histories and personalities certainly play a part. Once a game
session begins, the players take turns describing what their
characters attempt to do, while the GM determines
the outcome, with the table working together
toward a specific goal. The GM also describes
the environment, other characters’ actions,
and events. For example, the GM might
announce that the characters’ hometown
is under attack by marauding trolls. The
characters might track the trolls to a nearby
swamp—only to discover that the trolls were driven
from their swamp by a fearsome dragon! The
PCs then have the choice of taking on an
entire tribe of trolls, the dragon, or
both. Whatever they decide, their
success depends on their choices and
the die rolls they make during play.
A single narrative—including the
setup, plot, and conclusion—is called
an adventure. A series of adventures
creates an even larger narrative, called
a campaign. An adventure might take
several sessions to complete, whereas a
campaign might take months or even years!
Introduction 1
9
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Playing the Game
In a Pathfinder game, three modes of play determine the
pacing of each scene in the story. Most of your character’s
time is spent in exploration, uncovering mysteries, solving
problems, and interacting with other characters. The
Age of Lost Omens abounds with danger, however, and
characters often find themselves in an encounter, fighting
savage beasts and terrifying monsters. Finally, time moves
quickly when the characters enjoy downtime, a respite
from the world’s troubles and a chance to rest and train
for future expeditions. Throughout an adventure, game
play moves between these three modes many times, as
needed for the story. The more you play the game, the
more you’ll see that each mode has its own play style, but
moving from mode to mode has few hard boundaries.
During the game, your character will face situations
where the outcome is uncertain. A character might need
to climb a sheer cliff, track down a wounded chimera, or
sneak past a sleeping dragon, all of which are dangerous
tasks with a price for failure. In such cases, the acting
character (or characters) will be asked to attempt a check
to determine whether or not they succeed. A check is
usually made by rolling a single 20-sided die (a d20) and
adding a number based on the relevant ability. In such
cases, rolling high is always good.
Once a check is rolled, the GM compares the result to a
target number called the difficulty class (DC) to determine
the outcome. If the result of the check is equal to or greater
than the DC, the check is successful. If it is less, the check is
a failure. Beating the DC by 10 or more is referred to as a
critical success, which usually grants an especially positive
outcome. Similarly, failing the check by 10 or more is a
critical failure (sometimes called a fumble). This sometimes
results in additional negative effects. You also often score a
critical success by rolling a 20 on the die when attempting
a check (before adding anything). Likewise, rolling a 1 on
the die when attempting a check often results in a critical
failure. Note that not all checks have a special effect on a
critical success or critical failure and such results should
be treated just like an ordinary success or failure instead.
For example, in pursuit of the wounded chimera, your
character might find the path blocked by a fast-moving
river. You decide to swim across, but the GM declares this
a dangerous task and asks you to roll an Athletics skill
check (since swimming is covered by the Athletics skill). On
your character sheet, you see that your character has a +8
modifier for such checks. Rolling the d20, you get an 18, for
a total of 26. The GM compares this to the DC (which was
16) and finds that you got a critical success (since the result
exceeded the DC by 10). Your character swims quickly
across the river and continues the pursuit, drenched but
unharmed. Had you gotten a result less than 26 but equal
to or greater than 16, your character would have made it
halfway across the river. Had your result been less than 16,
your character might have been swept downriver or, worse,
been pulled under the current and begun to drown!
Checks like this are the heart of the game and are rolled
all the time, in every mode of play, to determine the outcome
of tasks. While the roll of the die is critical, the statistic you
add to the roll (called a modifier) often makes the difference
between success and failure. Every character is made up
of many such statistics governing what the character is
good at, each consisting of a relevant ability modifier plus
a proficiency bonus, and sometimes modified further by
other factors, such as bonuses or penalties from gear, spells,
feats, magic items, and other special circumstances.
Proficiency is a simple way of assessing your character’s
general level of training and aptitude for a given task. It
is broken into five different ranks: untrained, trained,
expert, master, and legendary. Each rank grants a different
proficiency bonus. If you’re untrained at a statistic, your
proficiency bonus is +0—you must rely solely on the raw
potential of your ability modifier. If your proficiency rank
for a statistic is trained, expert, master, and legendary, your
bonus equals your character’s level plus another number
based on the rank (2, 4, 6, and 8, respectively). Proficiency
ranks are part of almost every statistic in the game.
Exploration
Most of the time, your character will explore the world,
interact with characters, travel from place to place, and
overcome challenges. This is called exploration. Game play
is relatively free-form during exploration, with players
responding to the narrative whenever they have an idea of
what to do next. Leaving town via horseback, following the
trail of a marauding orc tribe, avoiding the tribe’s scouts, and
convincing a local hunter to help in an upcoming fight are
all examples of things that might occur during exploration.
Throughout this mode of play, the GM asks the players
what their characters are doing as they explore. This is
important in case a conflict arises. If combat breaks out,
the tasks the PCs undertook while exploring might give
them an edge or otherwise inform how the combat begins.
Encounters
In the course of your adventures, there will be times when
a simple skill check is not enough to resolve a challenge—
when fearsome monsters stand in your character’s way
and the only choice is to do battle. In Pathfinder, this is
called an encounter. Encounters usually involve combat,
but they can also be used in situations where timing is
critical, such as during a chase or when dodging hazards.
While exploration is handled in a free-form manner,
encounters are more structured. The players and GM roll
initiative to determine who acts in what order. The encounter
occurs over a number of rounds, each of which is equal to
about 6 seconds of time in the world of the game. During
a round, each participant takes a turn. When it’s your
turn to act, you can use up to three actions. Most simple
things, such as drawing a weapon, moving a short distance,
opening a door, or swinging a sword, use a single action to
perform. There are also activities that use more than a single
Core Rulebook
10
action to perform; these are often special abilities from your
character’s class and feats. One common activity in the game
is casting a spell, which usually uses two actions.
Free actions, such as dropping an object, don’t count
toward the three actions you can take on your turn. Finally,
each character can use up to one reaction during a round.
This special type of action can be used even when it’s not
your turn, but only in response to certain events, and only
if you have an ability that allows it. Rogues, for example,
can select a feat that lets them use their reaction to dodge
an incoming attack.
Attacking another creature is one of the most common
actions in combat, and is done by using the Strike action.
This requires an attack roll—a kind of check made against
the Armor Class (AC) of the creature you’re attacking.
Strikes can be made using weapons, spells, or even parts
of a creature’s body, like a fist, claw, or tail. You add a
modifier to this roll based on your proficiency rank with
the type of attack you’re using, your ability scores, and
any other bonuses or penalties based on the situation.
The target’s AC is calculated using their proficiency rank
in the armor they’re wearing and their Dexterity modifier.
An attack deals damage if it hits, and rolling a critical
success results in the attack dealing double damage!
You can use more than one Strike action on your turn,
but each additional attack after the first becomes less
accurate. This is reflected by a multiple attack penalty
that starts at –5 on the second attack, but increases to –10
on the third. There are many ways to reduce this penalty,
and it resets at the end of your turn.
If your character finds themself the target of a magical
lightning bolt or the freezing breath of a fearsome white
dragon, you will be called on to attempt a saving throw,
representing your character’s ability to avoid danger or
otherwise withstand an assault to their mind or body. A
saving throw is a check attempted against the DC of the
spell or special ability targeting your character. There are
three types of saving throws, and a character’s proficiency
in each says a great deal about what they can endure. A
Fortitude saving throw is used when your character’s health
or vitality is under attack, such as from poison or disease.
A Reflex saving throw is called for when your character
must dodge away from danger, usually something that
affects a large area, such as the scorching blast of a fireball
spell. Finally, a Will saving throw is often your defense
against spells and effects that target your character’s mind,
such as a charm or confusion spell. For all saving throws,
a success lessens the harmful effect, and scoring a critical
success usually means your character escapes unscathed.
Attacks, spells, hazards, and special abilities frequently
either deal damage to a character or impose one or more
conditions—and sometimes both. Damage is subtracted
from a creature’s Hit Points (HP)—a measure of health—
and when a creature is reduced to 0 HP, it falls unconscious
and may die! A combat encounter typically lasts until one
side has been defeated, and while this can mean retreat or
Introduction 1
11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
surrender, it most often happens because one side is dead or
dying. Conditions can hinder a creature for a time, limiting
the actions they can use and applying penalties to future
checks. Some conditions are even permanent, requiring a
character to seek out powerful magic to undo their effects.
Downtime
Characters don’t spend every waking moment
adventuring. Instead, they recover from wounds, plan
future conquests, or pursue a trade. In Pathfinder, this is
called downtime, and it allows time to pass quickly while
characters work toward long-term tasks or objectives.
Most characters can practice a trade in downtime,
earning a few coins, but those with the right skills can
instead spend time crafting, creating new gear or even
magic items. Characters can also use downtime to retrain,
replacing one character choice with another to reflect their
evolving priorities. They might also research a problem,
learn new spells, or even run a business or kingdom!
Key Terms
There are a number of important terms that you’ll need
to know as you create your first character or adventure.
Some of the most important terms mentioned on previous
pages are also included here for reference.
Ability Score
Each creature has six ability scores: Strength, Dexterity,
Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma. These
scores represent a creature’s raw potential and basic
attributes. The higher the score, the greater the creature’s
potential in that ability. Ability scores are described in full
later in this chapter.
Alignment
Alignment represents a creature’s fundamental moral and
ethical attitude.
Ancestry
An ancestry is the broad family of people that a character
belongs to. Ancestry determines a character’s starting Hit
Points, languages, senses, and Speed, and it grants access
to ancestry feats. Ancestries can be found in Chapter 2.
Armor Class (AC)
All creatures in the game have an Armor Class. This score
represents how hard it is to hit and damage a creature. It
serves as the Difficulty Class for hitting a creature with
an attack.
Attack
When a creature tries to harm another creature, it makes
a Strike or uses some other attack action. Most attacks
are Strikes made with a weapon, but a character might
Strike with their fist, grapple or shove with their hands,
or attack with a spell.
Background
A background represents what a character experienced
before they took up the life of an adventurer. Each
background grants a feat and training in one or more
skills. You can read more about backgrounds in Chapter 2.
Bonuses and Penalties
Bonuses and penalties apply to checks and certain
statistics. There are several types of bonuses and penalties.
If you have more than one bonus of the same type, you
use only the highest bonus. Likewise, you use only the
worst penalty of each type.
Class
A class represents the adventuring profession chosen by
a character. A character’s class determines most of their
proficiencies, grants the character Hit Points each time
they gain a new level, and gives access to a set of class
feats. Classes appear in Chapter 3.
Condition
An ongoing effect that changes how a character can act, or
that alters some of their statistics, is called a condition. The
rules for the basic conditions used in the game can be found
in the Conditions Appendix at the back of this book.
Currency
The most common currencies in the game are gold pieces
(gp) and silver pieces (sp). One gp is worth 10 sp. In
addition, 1 sp is worth 10 copper pieces (cp), and 10 gp
are worth 1 platinum piece (pp). Characters begin play
with 15 gp (or 150 sp) to spend on equipment.
Feat
A feat is an ability you can select for your character due to
their ancestry, background, class, general training, or skill
training. Some feats grant the ability to use special actions.
Game Master (GM)
The Game Master is the player who adjudicates the rules
and narrates the various elements of the Pathfinder story
and world that the other players explore.
Golarion
Pathfinder is set on the planet Golarion during the Age of
Lost Omens. It is an ancient world with a rich diversity
of people and cultures, exciting locations to explore, and
deadly villains. More information on the Age of Lost
Omens, the world of Golarion, and its deities can be
found in Chapter 8.
Hit Points (HP)
Hit Points represent the amount of punishment a creature
can take before it falls unconscious and begins dying.
Damage decreases Hit Points on a 1-to-1 basis, while
healing restores Hit Points at the same rate.
Core Rulebook
12
Initiative
At the start of an encounter, all creatures involved roll for
initiative to determine the order in which they act. The
higher the result of its roll, the earlier a creature gets to act.
Initiative and combat are described in Chapter 9.
Level
A level is a number that measures something’s overall
power. Player characters have a level, ranging from 1st
to 20th, representing their level of experience. Monsters,
NPCs, hazards, diseases, and poisons have levels ranging
from –1 to 30 that measure the danger they pose. An item’s
level, usually within the range of 0 to 20 but sometimes
higher, indicates its power and suitability as treasure.
Spells have levels ranging from 1st to 10th, which
measure their power; characters and monsters can usually
cast only a certain number of spells of any given level.
Nonplayer Character (NPC)
A nonplayer character, controlled by the GM, interacts
with players and helps advance the story.
Perception
Perception measures your character’s ability to notice
hidden objects or unusual situations, and it usually
determines how quickly the character springs into action
in combat. It is described in full in Chapter 9.
Player Character (PC)
This is a character created and controlled by a player.
Proficiency
Proficiency is a system that measures a character’s aptitude
at a specific task or quality, and it has five ranks: untrained,
trained, expert, master, and legendary. Proficiency gives
you a bonus that’s added when determining the following
modifiers and statistics: AC, attack rolls, Perception, saving
throws, skills, and the effectiveness of spells. If you’re
untrained, your proficiency bonus is +0. If you’re trained,
expert, master, or legendary, your proficiency bonus equals
your level plus 2, 4, 6, or 8, respectively.
Rarity
Some elements of the game have a rarity to denote how
often they’re encountered in the game world. Rarity
primarily applies to equipment and magic items, but
spells, feats, and other rules elements also have a rarity.
If no rarity appears in the traits of an item, spell, or other
game element, it is of common rarity. Uncommon items are
available only to those who have special training, grew up
in a certain culture, or come from a particular part of the
world. Rare items are almost impossible to find and are
usually given out only by the GM, while unique ones are
literally one-of-a-kind in the game. The GM might alter the
way rarity works or change the rarity of individual items
to suit the story they want to tell.
Roleplaying
Describing a character’s actions, often while acting from
the perspective of the character, is called roleplaying. When
a player speaks or describes action from the perspective of
a character, they are “in character.”
Round
A round is a period of time during an encounter in which
all participants get a chance to act. A round represents
approximately 6 seconds in game time.
Saving Throw (Save)
When a creature is subject to a dangerous effect that must
be avoided, it attempts a saving throw to mitigate the effect.
You attempt a saving throw automatically—you don’t
have to use an action or a reaction. Unlike for most checks,
the character who isn’t acting rolls the d20 for a saving
throw, and the creature who is acting provides the DC.
There are three types of saving throws: Fortitude (to
resist diseases, poisons, and physical effects), Reflex (to
evade effects a character could quickly dodge), and Will
(to resist effects that target the mind and personality).
Skill
A skill represents a creature’s ability to perform certain
tasks that require instruction or practice. Skills are fully
described in Chapter 4. Each skill includes ways anyone
can use that skill even if untrained, as well as uses that
require a character to be trained in the skill.
Speed
Speed is the distance a character can move using a single
action, measured in feet.
Spell
Spells are magical effects created by performing mystical
incantations and gestures known only to those with special
training or inborn abilities. Casting a spell is an activity
that usually uses two actions. Each spell specifies what it
targets, the actions needed to cast it, its effects, and how
it can be resisted. If a class grants spells, the basics of that
ability are provided in the class description in Chapter 3,
while the spells themselves are detailed in Chapter 7.
Trait
A trait is a keyword that conveys additional information
about a rules element, such as a school of magic or rarity.
Often, a trait indicates how other rules interact with an
ability, creature, item, or another rules element that has
that trait. All the traits used in this book appear in the
Glossary and Index beginning on page 628.
Turn
During the course of a round, each creature takes a single
turn according to initiative. A creature can typically use
up to three actions during its turn.
Introduction 1
13
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Example of Play
The following example is presented to give you a better idea
of how the game of Pathfinder is played. In this adventure,
Erik is the GM. Lyz is playing Valeros, a daring human
fighter, James is playing Merisiel, a deadly elven rogue, and
Judy is taking on the role of Kyra, a fiery human cleric of
Sarenrae. The group has just defeated a horde of undead
and is making its way into an ancient mausoleum.
Erik: The entrance to the crypt stands before you,
a set of crumbling stairs leading down into
darkness. A terrible smell issues forth from the
doorway—the stench of old, rotted flesh.
Lyz: I’m not afraid of a foul stink! I draw my sword
and ready my shield.
Judy: The light of Sarenrae will guide us. I cast my
light spell on my religious symbol.
Erik: All right, a glowing radiance spills forth,
illuminating the stairs. They appear to go
down only about 10 feet before opening up
into a chamber. Puddles of stagnant water fill
the cracks between uneven stone tiles.
James: I should go first to make sure it’s safe. I’m going
to draw my rapier and carefully go down the
stairs, looking for traps as I go.
Erik: Sure, but looking for traps is a secret check, so I’ll
roll for you. What’s your Perception modifier?
James: I have a +5.
Erik rolls a d20 behind his GM screen, hidden from the
players’ view, and gets a 17 on the die for a total of 22,
more than enough to find the trip wire on the third step.
Erik: Your caution pays off! You spot a thin wire
located at ankle height just above the third stair.
James: I point it out to the others and head down.
Lyz: I follow right behind Merisiel, avoiding the wire
but otherwise keeping an eye out for danger.
Judy: Me too.
Erik: Okay! You make it down the stairs to find
yourselves in a crypt. Ancient wood coffins are
arranged around the room, covered in cobwebs
and dust. Directly ahead, on a raised dais, is
a stone casket adorned with wicked-looking
symbols. You can tell that it was once wrapped
in iron chains, but now twisted links are scattered
around the room, along with chunks of what
must have been the casket’s lid. From the damage,
it looks like it was shattered from within!
Judy: Sarenrae protect us. I draw my blade and
advance—I want a better look at those symbols.
Lyz: I’ll keep pace with her. I don’t like the look of this.
James: I think I’ll stay back here and hide behind one
of the coffins.
Erik: Merisiel takes cover while the two of you
advance. As you draw near, the stench of rot
grows stronger until it’s almost overpowering.
Suddenly you see the source of the horrid odor.
Rising up out of the casket is a nightmarish
dead thing. It might have once been a human,
but it’s hard to tell from its withered body. Its
flesh is the color of a new bruise, pulled so
tight across its bones that it has split in places.
It’s hairless, with pointed ears, but worst of all,
its mouth is lined with tiny, sharp teeth and its
tongue is entirely too long.
Lyz: So, not a friend?
Erik: Most certainly not. It looks poised to leap at
you and attack. Roll for initiative! Valeros and
Kyra need to roll Perception, while Merisiel
should roll Stealth.
Everyone rolls for their initiative. Lyz rolls a 2 for Valeros,
getting a total of 8. Judy rolls better for Kyra, getting
a total of 14. James uses Stealth for Initiative, because
Merisiel was hiding at the start of the fight, and rolls a
17 for a total of 25! Erik rolls for the undead creature,
getting a 12. Erik records all these totals, putting the
characters in order from highest to lowest.
Erik: Looks like Merisiel gets to act first. Whatever
that thing is, you’re pretty sure it doesn’t know
you are there.
James: Awesome! For my first action, I want to draw a
dagger. For my second, I want to move closer.
Erik: You can get to within 15 feet of it with one
Stride action.
James: Perfect. For my final action, I’m going to throw
my dagger at it!
James rolls a 13 and adds 8, due to Merisiel’s skill at
thrown daggers, for a total of 21, but the range means
he takes a –2 penalty for a result of 19. Erik consults his
notes to learn that the monster has an AC of 18.
Erik: That’s a hit! Go ahead and roll damage.
James: Okay, and I get to add extra damage due to
sneak attack.
Rogues have the ability to deal extra damage to foes that
haven’t acted yet in an encounter. This extra damage also
applies to attacks against enemies that are distracted. James
rolls 1d4 for the dagger and 1d6 for the sneak attack, and
he adds 4 for Merisiel’s Dexterity, getting a total of 9.
Erik: It hisses as the blade sinks into its shoulder. That
looks like it hurt, but the undead thing doesn’t
appear to be slowing down. James, that was all
three of your actions. Next up is Kyra!
Judy: I think this is undead. What do I know about it?
Erik: You use an action to recall your training about
the living dead. Give me a Religion skill check.
Core Rulebook
14
Judy rolls a 16, adding Kyra’s +8 with Religion to get a
total of 24.
Erik: At first, you thought this thing might be a
ghoul, which is a type of undead that feasts
on the flesh of the dead, but the terrible smell
reveals the truth. This thing is a ghast, a more
powerful type of ghoul. You are pretty sure
that its stench can make you sick and that its
claws can paralyze you with a touch.
Judy: This is bad. I am going to spend my last two
actions to cast bless. It gives anyone next to me
a +1 bonus to attack rolls.
Casting this spell is an activity that requires two actions
to complete, and it has two components. The complex
gestures needed to invoke the spell are the somatic
component, and Kyra’s prayers to her deity are the
verbal component.
Erik: Okay! The ghast leaps from the casket straight
toward Merisiel. The stench of its rotting
body is absolutely horrific up close. Attempt a
Fortitude save!
James rolls an 8, for a total of 14.
Erik: Not quite enough—you gain the sickened 1
condition, which is going to give you a –1
penalty to most of your d20 rolls. Next, it
lunges at you, trying to bite you!
James: Oh no! I use my reaction to nimbly dodge out
of the way.
Erik rolls an attack roll for the ghast, getting an 9 on the
die. Looking at the monster’s statistics, he adds 11 for a
total of 20. Merisiel’s AC is normally 19, but the Nimble
Dodge feat lets her use her reaction to increase her AC by 2
against a single attack. In this case, it turns the ghast’s attack
into a miss.
Erik: Does a 20 hit you?
James: Nope, just missed!
Erik: You twist away from the ghast as its tongue
leaves a slimy film on your armor. With its final
action, the undead menace lashes out at you
with its claw.
Erik rolls a second attack with the ghast, this time with its
claw. Normally this attack would take a –5 multiple attack
penalty, but since the claw has the agile trait, the penalty is
only –4. He rolls a 19 on the die, adds 11 for the ghoul’s
attack modifier and subtracts 4, for a total of 26.
Erik: You may have dodged the ghast’s bite, but the
thing’s bony claw rakes across your face!
Erik knows this is a hit and rolls the ghast’s claw damage,
getting a total of 8.
Erik: Take 8 points of damage, and I need you to
attempt a Fortitude saving throw as a numbing
sensation spreads from the wound.
James rolls a Fortitude saving throw. He gets a 4 on the
die, and after adding his bonus and the penalty from the
sickened condition, it comes out to only a 9.
James: This isn’t my day. I don’t suppose a 9 is good
enough?
Erik: I am afraid not. You are paralyzed!
Erik notes that Merisiel is paralyzed, making her unable
to act, but she will get a new saving throw at the end of
each of her turns to shake off the effect.
Erik: A dry, creaking laugh escapes the ghast’s curled
lips, but that’s the end of its turn. Valeros, you
are the last one to act this round.
Lyz: About time, too! I raise my shield and use my
final two actions to make a Sudden Charge!
Sudden Charge is a fighter feat that lets Valeros move up
to twice his Speed and attack at the end of his movement,
all for only two actions.
Erik: As you draw near, the smell is horrific. Attempt
a Fortitude save.
After rolling, Lyz gets a 19 on the Fortitude save.
Erik: You fight off the nausea from this thing’s
stench. Make your attack roll.
Lyz rolls the die and it comes up a 20.
Lyz: I got a 20! That must be a critical success!
Erik: Your blade hits the vile creature right in the
neck, dealing double damage!
Lyz rolls a 5 on her d8, then adds 4 because of Valeros’s
Strength modifier. Because it is a critical success, she then
doubles the total.
Lyz: A mighty 18 damage! That surely had to kill it!
Erik: I’m afraid not. Black ichor runs from the deep
wound on its neck, but it only turns to look at
you. You can see burning hatred in its eyes!
Lyz: Uh-oh.
That is the end of the first round of combat. The second
round begins immediately after this, using the same
initiative order as before. The fight is far from over…
Introduction 1
15
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Using This Book
While this chapter is here to teach you the basics of
Pathfinder, the rest of this rulebook serves as a reference
manual during play, and it is organized to make finding
the rule you need as easy as possible. Rules are grouped
together in chapters, with the early chapters focusing on
character creation. The last two chapters contain rules
for GMs, with advice on how to run a game of Pathfinder
and a rich array of treasure. The following is a summary
of what you can expect to find in each chapter.
Chapter 1: Introduction
This introduction is designed to help you understand the
basics of Pathfinder. This chapter also includes the rules
for building and leveling up a character. The chapter ends
with an example of building a 1st-level character.
Chapter 2: Ancestries & Backgrounds
The rules for the most common ancestries in the Age of
Lost Omens are in this chapter, including their ancestry
feat options. Backgrounds are at the end of this chapter,
along with a section about languages, as these are most
often influenced by your choice of ancestry.
Chapter 3: Classes
This chapter contains the rules for all 12 classes. Each
class entry includes guidelines on playing the class, rules
for building and advancing a character of that class,
sample builds, and all of the class feats available to
members of that class. This chapter also includes rules
for animal companions and familiars, which can be
acquired by members of several different classes. At the
end of this chapter are the rules for archetypes—special
options available to characters as they increase in level.
These rules allow a character to dabble in the abilities of
another class or concept.
Chapter 4: Skills
The rules for using skills are presented in this chapter,
and they detail what a character can do with a given
skill, based on that character’s proficiency rank.
Ancestry, background, and class can define some of
a character’s skill proficiencies, and each character
can also select a few additional skills to reflect their
personality and training.
Chapter 5: Feats
As a character advances in level, they gain additional
feats to represent their growing abilities. General feats
and skill feats (which are a subset of general feats) are
presented in this chapter.
Chapter 6: Equipment
Armor, weapons, and other gear can all be found in this
chapter, along with the price for services, cost of living,
and animals (such as horses, dogs, and pack animals).
Chapter 7: Spells
This chapter starts with rules for casting spells,
determining their effects, and getting rid of foes’ spells
(called counteracting). After that, the spell lists for
each spellcasting tradition are included, making it easy
to quickly find spells by their level. Next are rules for
every spell, presented in alphabetical order. Following
the spell descriptions are all of the focus spells—special
spells granted by specific class abilities and feats. While
most spells appear on multiple spell lists, focus spells
are granted only to members of a specific class and are
grouped together by class for ease of reference. Finally, at
the end of the chapter are rules for rituals, complicated
and risky spells that any character can cast.
Chapter 8: the age of lost omens
The setting of Golarion is described in this chapter,
including a brief overview of the world and its people,
followed by a timeline of events. Most importantly,
characters who venerate a deity should look to this
chapter to find the rules associated with their faith.
Chapter 9: Playing the Game
This important chapter contains the universal rules
needed to play Pathfinder, including rules for the various
modes of play, the basic actions that every character can
perform, the rules for combat, and the rules for death and
dying. Every player should be familiar with this chapter,
especially the GM.
Chapter 10: Game Mastering
Packed full of guidelines and advice, this chapter helps
Game Masters tell an interesting and compelling story.
It also includes advice on creating a fun and encouraging
game space and guides for empowering players to create
characters they want to play. This chapter also includes
rules that are particularly important for the GM to know,
such as rules dealing with traps, environmental dangers,
and afflictions (such as curses, diseases, and poisons), as
well as guidance on setting DCs and handing out rewards
to player characters.
Chapter 11: Crafting & Treasure
The treasures characters find during their adventures
take many forms, from gold and gemstones to powerful
magical weapons. This chapter details guidelines for
distributing treasure to characters, as well as descriptions
of hundreds of magic items. This chapter also contains
the rules for alchemical items.
Appendices
The back of this book has an appendix with the rules
for all of the conditions that you will find in the game.
This section also includes a blank character sheet, and an
index with a comprehensive glossary of common terms
and traits that you’ll encounter in the game.
Core Rulebook
16
Format of Rules Elements
Throughout this rulebook, you will see formatting standards that might look a
bit unusual at first. Specifically, the game’s rules are set apart in this text using
specialized capitalization and italicization. These standards are in place to make
this book rules elements easier to recognize.
The names of specific statistics, skills, feats, actions, and some other mechanical
elements in Pathfinder are capitalized. This way, when you see the statement “a Strike
targets Armor Class,” you know that both Strike and Armor Class are referring
to rules.
If a word or a phrase is italicized, it is describing a spell or a magic item. This way,
when you see the statement “the door is sealed by lock,” you know that in this case
the word denotes the lock spell, rather than a physical item.
Pathfinder also uses many terms that are typically expressed as abbreviations, like
AC for Armor Class, DC for Difficulty Class, and HP for Hit Points. If you’re ever
confused about a game term or an abbreviation, you can always turn to the Glossary
and Index, beginning on page 628, and look it up.
Understanding Actions
Characters and their adversaries affect the world of Pathfinder by using actions
and producing effects. This is especially the case during encounters, when every
action counts. When you use an action, you generate an effect. This effect might
be automatic, but sometimes actions necessitate that you roll a die, and the effect is
based on what you rolled.
Throughout this book, you will see special icons to denote actions.
[one-action] Single Actions
Single actions use this symbol: [one-action]. They’re the simplest, most common type of action.
You can use three single actions on your turn in an encounter, in any order you see fit.
[reaction] ]Reactions
Reactions use this symbol: [reaction]. These actions can be used even when it’s not your
turn. You get only one reaction per encounter round, and you can use it only when
its specific trigger is fulfilled. Often, the trigger is another creature’s action.
[free-action] ]Free Actions
Free actions use this symbol: [free-action]. Free actions don’t require you to spend any of
your three single actions or your reaction. A free action might have a trigger like
a reaction does. If so, you can use it just like a reaction—even if it’s not your turn.
However, you can use only one free action per trigger, so if you have multiple free
actions with the same trigger, you have to decide which to use. If a free action
doesn’t have a trigger, you use it like a single action, just without spending any of
your actions for the turn.
Activities
Activities are special tasks that you complete by spending one or more of your actions
together. Usually, an activity uses two or more actions and lets you do more than a
single action would allow. You have to spend all the actions an activity requires for
its effects to happen. Spellcasting is one of the most common activities, as most spells
take more than a single action to cast.
Activities that use two actions use this symbol: [two-actions]. Activities that use three
actions use this symbol: [three-actions]. A few special activities, such as spells you can cast in
an instant, can be performed by spending a free action or a reaction.
All tasks that take longer than a turn are activities. If an activity is meant to
be done during exploration, it has the exploration trait. An activity that takes a
day or more of commitment and that can be done only during downtime has the
downtime trait.
[one-action]
Single Action
[two-actions]
Two-Action
Activity
[three-actions]]
Three-Action
Activity
[[reaction]]
Reaction
[free-action]
Free Action
Introduction 1
17
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Reading Rules
This book contains hundreds of rules elements that
give characters new and interesting ways to respond to
situations in the game. All characters can use the basic
actions found in Chapter 9, but an individual character
often has special rules that allow them to do things most
other characters can’t. Most of these options are feats,
which are gained by making certain choices at character
creation or when a character advances in level.
Regardless of the game mechanic they convey, rules
elements are always presented in the form of a stat block,
a summary of the rules necessary to bring the monster,
character, item, or other rules element to life during play.
Where appropriate, stat blocks are introduced with an
explanation of their format. For example, the Ancestry
section of Chapter 2 contains rules for each of the game’s
six core ancestries, and an explanation of these rules
appears at the beginning of that chapter.
The general format for stat blocks is shown below. Entries
are omitted from a stat block when they don’t apply, so not
all rule elements have all of the entries given below. Actions,
reactions, and free actions each have the corresponding icon
next to their name to indicate their type. An activity that
can be completed in a single turn has a symbol indicating
how many actions are needed to complete it; activities that
take longer to perform omit these icons. If a character must
attain a certain level before accessing an ability, that level
is indicated to the right of the stat block’s name. Rules also
often have traits associated with them (traits appear in the
Glossary and Index).
Spells, alchemical items, and magic items use a similar
format, but their stat blocks contain a number of unique
elements (see Chapter 7 for more on reading spells, and
Chapter 11 for more on alchemical and magic items).
ACTION OR FEAT NAME [one-action] LEVEL
TRAITS
Prerequisites Any minimum ability scores, feats, proficiency
ranks, or other prerequisites you must have before you can
access this rule element are listed here. Feats also have a level
prerequisite, which appears above.
Frequency This is the limit on how many times you can use
the ability within a given time.
Trigger Reactions and some free actions have triggers that
must be met before they can be used.
Requirements Sometimes you must have a certain item or be
in a certain circumstance to use an ability. If so, it’s listed
in this section.
This section describes the effects or benefits of a rule element.
If the rule is an action, it explains what the effect is or what
you must roll to determine the effect. If it’s a feat that modifies
an existing action or grants a constant effect, the benefit is
explained here.
Special Any special qualities of the rule are explained in
this section. Usually this section appears in feats you can select
more than once, explaining what happens when you do.
Core Rulebook
18
Character Creation
Unless you’re the GM, the first thing you need to do when
playing Pathfinder is create your character. It’s up to you to
imagine your character’s past experiences, personality, and
worldview, and this will set the stage for your roleplaying
during the game. You’ll use the game’s mechanics to
determine your character’s ability to perform various tasks
and use special abilities during the game.
This section provides a step-by-step guide for creating a
character using the Pathfinder rules, preceded by a guide to
help you understand ability scores. These scores are a critical
part of your character, and you will be asked to make choices
about them during many of the following steps. The steps of
character creation are presented in a suggested order, but
you can complete them in whatever order you prefer.
Many of the steps on pages 21–28 instruct you to fill out
fields on your character sheet. The character sheet is shown
on pages 24–25; you can find a copy in the back of this book
or online as a free pdf. The character sheet is designed to
be easy to use when you’re actually playing the game—but
creating a character happens in a different order, so you’ll
move back and forth through the character sheet as you
go through the character creation process. Additionally, the
character sheet includes every field you might need, even
though not all characters will have something to put in each
field. If a field on your character sheet is not applicable to
your character, just leave that field blank.
All the steps of character creation are detailed on the
following pages; each is marked with a number that
corresponds to the sample character sheet on pages 24–25,
showing you where the information goes. If the field
you need to fill out is on the third or fourth page of the
character sheet, which aren’t shown, the text will tell you.
If you’re creating a higher-level character, it’s a good
idea to begin with the instructions here, then turn to
page 29 for instructions on leveling up characters.
The Six Ability Scores
One of the most important aspects of your character is
their ability scores. These scores represent your character’s
raw potential and influence nearly every other statistic on
your character sheet. Determining your ability scores is
not done all at once, but instead happens over several
steps during character creation.
Ability scores are split into two main groups: physical
and mental. Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution are
physical ability scores, measuring your character’s physical
power, agility, and stamina. In contrast, Intelligence,
Wisdom, and Charisma are mental ability scores and
measure your character’s learned prowess, awareness, and
force of personality.
Excellence in an ability score improves the checks and
statistics related to that ability, as described below. When
imagining your character, you should also decide what
ability scores you want to focus on to give you the best
chance at success.
Strength
Strength measures your character’s physical power.
Strength is important if your character plans to engage in
hand-to-hand combat. Your Strength modifier gets added
to melee damage rolls and determines how much your
character can carry.
Dexterity
Dexterity measures your character’s agility, balance, and
reflexes. Dexterity is important if your character plans
to make attacks with ranged weapons or use stealth to
surprise foes. Your Dexterity modifier is also added to
your character’s AC and Reflex saving throws.
Constitution
Constitution measures your character’s overall health
and stamina. Constitution is an important statistic for
all characters, especially those who fight in close combat.
Your Constitution modifier is added to your Hit Points
and Fortitude saving throws.
Intelligence
Intelligence measures how well your character can learn
and reason. A high Intelligence allows your character to
analyze situations and understand patterns, and it means
they can become trained in additional skills and might be
able to master additional languages.
Wisdom
Wisdom measures your character’s common sense,
awareness, and intuition. Your Wisdom modifier is added
to your Perception and Will saving throws.
Charisma
Charisma measures your character’s personal magnetism
and strength of personality. A high Charisma score helps
you influence the thoughts and moods of others.
Introduction 1
19
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SPECIAL 1st FEATURE 1st
FEAT 6th
FEATURE 13th
BACKGROUND
FEAT 1st FEAT 1st
FEAT 8th
FEATURE 15th
4th
FEAT 9th FEATURE 3rd
FEAT 10th
FEATURE 17th
8th
16th
11th
HERITAGE 1st FEATURE 1st
FEATURE 7th
FEAT 14th
2nd
FEAT 2nd
FEATURE 9th
FEAT 16th
6th
14th
7th
FEAT 13th FEAT 4th
FEATURE 11th
FEAT 18th
10th
18th
15th
FEAT 17th FEATURE 5th
FEAT 5th
FEAT 12th
FEATURE 19th
FEAT 20th
12th
3rd
20th
19th
READIED ITEMS OTHER ITEMS BULK BULK
Ancestry Feats and Abilities
Class Feats and Abilities
Skill Feats
General Feats
Bonus Feats
Inventory
WORN ITEMS
ENCUMBERED
= 5 MAXIMUM
STR
STR
=
BASE
BASE
10
BULK INVEST
(MAX 10)
Permission granted to photocopy for personal use only.
CP SP GP PP
BULK
CharacterSheet.indd 581 3/25/19 1:59 PM
Hit Points
Perception
Skills
Armor Class
Saving Throws
DECEPTION
PERFORMANCE
ATHLETICS
NATURE
INTIMIDATION
SOCIETY
SURVIVAL
ARCANA
ACROBATICS
MEDICINE
DIPLOMACY
RELIGION
CRAFTING
OCCULTISM
LORE
STEALTH
THIEVERY
LORE
RESISTANCES AND IMMUNITIES
CONDITIONS
PROF ITEM T E M L
MAX HP BT CURRENT HP
REFLEX
ITEM
DEX PROF
WILL
ITEM
WIS PROF
T E M L T E M L T E M L
T E M L
FORTITUDE
ITEM
CON PROF
WIS PROF ITEM
DYING WOUNDED
CURRENT TEMPORARY
Languages
Class DC
DEX CAP
OR 10
DC BASE
=
T E M L KEY PROF ITEM
Weapon Proficiencies
T E M L SIMPLE T E M L OTHER T E M L OTHER T E M L MARTIAL
10
DC BASE
=
STR
MODIFIER
STRENGTH SCORE
DEX
MODIFIER
DEXTERITY SCORE
CON
MODIFIER
CONSTITUTION SCORE
INT
MODIFIER
INTELLIGENCE SCORE
WIS
MODIFIER
WISDOM SCORE
CHA
MODIFIER
CHARISMA SCORE
Melee Strikes Weapon
P
S
B
STR PROF
= T E M L ITEM
Damage
DICE STR W SPEC OTHER TRAITS
Weapon
P
S
B
STR PROF
= T E M L ITEM
Damage
DICE STR W SPEC OTHER TRAITS
Weapon
P
S
B
STR PROF
= T E M L ITEM
Damage
DICE STR W SPEC OTHER TRAITS
Weapon
P
S
B
DEX PROF
= T E M L ITEM
Damage
DICE SPECIAL W SPEC OTHER TRAITS
Weapon
P
S
B
DEX PROF
= T E M L ITEM
Damage
DICE SPECIAL W SPEC OTHER TRAITS
Weapon
P
S
B
DEX PROF
= T E M L ITEM
Damage
DICE SPECIAL W SPEC OTHER TRAITS
Ranged Strikes
SENSES NOTES
speed feet MOVEMENT TYPES & NOTES
UNARMORED
T E M L
MEDIUM
T E M L
LIGHT
T E M L
HEAVY
T E M L
= T E M L INT PROF ITEM
= T E M L STR PROF ITEM
= T E M L INT PROF ITEM
= T E M L CHA PROF ITEM
= T E M L CHA PROF ITEM
= T E M L CHA PROF ITEM
= T E M L INT PROF ITEM
= T E M L INT PROF ITEM
= T E M L WIS PROF ITEM
= T E M L WIS PROF ITEM
= T E M L INT PROF ITEM
= T E M L CHA PROF ITEM
= T E M L WIS PROF ITEM
= T E M L INT PROF ITEM
= T E M L WIS PROF ITEM
= T E M L DEX PROF ITEM
= T E M L DEX PROF ITEM
= T E M L DEX PROF ITEM
Ability Scores
HARDNESS
Permission granted to photocopy for personal use only.
Character Sheet PROFICIENCY
Untrained +0
Trained 2+Level
Expert 4+Level
Master 6+Level
Legendary 8+Level
[one-action] Single Action
[two-actions] Two-Action Activity
[three-actions] Three-Action Activity
[free-action] Free Action
[reaction] Reaction
Player
Name
Experience
Points (XP)
Character
Name
Shield
Ancestry and Heritage
Background
Class
Size Alignment Traits
Deity
Level
Hero Points
+
= MAX
AC
ARMOR
-
ARMOR
-
ARMOR
-
ARMOR
-
CharacterSheet.indd 580 3/25/19 3:12 PM
Ability Score Overview
Each ability score starts at 10, representing human
average, but as you make character choices, you’ll adjust
these scores by applying ability boosts, which increase a
score, and ability flaws, which decrease a score. As you
build your character, remember to apply ability score
adjustments when making the following decisions.
Ancestry: Each ancestry provides ability boosts, and
sometimes an ability flaw. If you are taking any voluntary
flaws, apply them in this step (see the sidebar on page 24).
Background: Your character’s background provides two
ability boosts.
Class: Your character’s class provides an ability boost to
the ability score most important to your class, called your
key ability score.
Determine Scores: After the other steps, you apply four
more ability boosts of your choice. Then, determine your
ability modifiers based on those scores.
Ability Boosts
An ability boost normally increases an ability score’s
value by 2. However, if the ability score to which you’re
applying an ability boost is already 18 or higher, its value
increases by only 1. At 1st level, a character can never
have any ability score that’s higher than 18.
When your character receives an ability boost, the rules
indicate whether it must be applied to a specific ability
score or to one of two specific ability scores, or whether it
is a “free” ability boost that can be applied to any ability
score of your choice. However, when you gain multiple
ability boosts at the same time, you must apply each one to
a different score. Dwarves, for example, receive an ability
boost to their Constitution score and their Wisdom score,
as well as one free ability boost, which can be applied to
any score other than Constitution or Wisdom.
Ability Flaws
Ability flaws are not nearly as common in Pathfinder as
ability boosts. If your character has an ability flaw—likely
from their ancestry—you decrease that ability score by 2.
Ability Modifiers
Once you’ve finalized your ability scores, you can use them
to determine your ability modifiers, which are used in most
other statistics in the game. Find the score in Table 1–1:
Ability Modifiers to determine its ability modifier.
TABLE 1–1: ABILITY MODIFIERS
Ability Score Modifier Ability Score Modifier
1 –5 14–15 +2
2–3 –4 16–17 +3
4–5 –3 18–19 +4
6–7 –2 20–21 +5
8–9 –1 22–23 +6
10–11 +0 24–25 +7
12–13 +1 etc...
The standard method of generating ability scores that’s
described above works great if you want to create a perfectly
customized, balanced character. But your GM may decide to
add a little randomness to character creation and let the dice
decide what kind of character the players are going to play. In
that case, you can use this alternative method to generate your
ability scores. Be warned—the same randomness that makes
this system fun also allows it to sometimes create characters
that are significantly more (or less) powerful than the standard
ability score system and other Pathfinder rules assume.
If your GM opts for rolling ability scores, follow these
alternative steps, ignoring all other instructions and guidelines
about applying ability boosts and ability flaws throughout the
character generation process.
STEP 1: ROLL AND ASSIGN SCORES
Roll four 6-sided dice (4d6) and discard the lowest die result.
Add the three remaining results together and record the sum.
(For example, if you rolled a 2, 4, 5, and 6, you would discard
the 2 and your total would be 15.) Repeat this process until
you’ve generated six such values. Decide which value you want
for each of your ability scores.
STEP 2: ASSIGN ABILITY BOOSTS AND
ABILITY FLAWS
Apply the ability boosts your character gains from their
ancestry, but your character gets one fewer free ability
boost than normal. If your character’s ancestry has any
ability flaws, apply those next. Finally, apply one ability
boost to one of the ability scores specified in the character’s
background (you do not get the other free ability boost).
These ability boosts cannot raise a score above 18. If this
would happen, you can put the ability boost into another
ability score instead, as if it were a free ability boost, or you
can put it into an ability score of 17 to reach 18 and lose the
excess increase.
STEP 3: RECORD SCORES AND MODIFIERS
Record the final scores and assign the ability modifiers
according to Table 1–1. When your character receives
additional ability boosts at higher levels, you assign them
as any character would.
ALTERNATIVE METHOD: ROLLING ABILITY SCORES
2 4 5 6
Core Rulebook
20
1 Step 1
Create a Concept
What sort of hero do you want to play? The answer to
this question might be as simple as “a brave warrior,” or as
complicated as “the child of elven wanderers, but raised in a
city dominated by humans and devoted to Sarenrae, goddess
of the sun.” Consider your character’s personality, sketch out
a few details about their past, and think about how and why
they adventure. You’ll want to peruse Pathfinder’s available
ancestries, backgrounds, and classes. The summaries on
pages 22–23 might help you match your concept with some
of these basic rule elements. Before a game begins, it’s also
a good idea for the players to discuss how their characters
might know each other and how they’ll work together
throughout the course of their adventures.
There are many ways to approach your character concept.
Once you have a good idea of the character you’d like to
play, move on to Step 2 to start building your character.
Ancestry, Background, Class, or Details
If one of Pathfinder’s character ancestries, backgrounds,
or classes particularly intrigues you, it’s easy to build a
character concept around these options. The summaries of
ancestries and classes on pages 22–23 give a brief overview
of these options (full details appear in Chapters 2 and 3,
respectively). Each ancestry also has several heritages that
might refine your concept further, such as a human with an
elf or orc parent, or an arctic or woodland elf. Additionally,
the game has many backgrounds to choose from,
representing your character’s upbringing, their family’s
livelihood, or their earliest profession. Backgrounds are
detailed later in Chapter 2, beginning on page 60.
Building a character around a specific ancestry,
background, or class can be a fun way to interact with the
world’s lore. Would you like to build a typical member
of your character’s ancestry or class, as described in the
relevant entry, or would you prefer to play a character
who defies commonly held notions about their people?
For example, you could play a dwarf with a wide-eyed
sense of wonder and a zest for change, or a performing
rogue capable of amazing acrobatic feats but with little
interest in sneaking about.
You can draw your concept from any aspect of a
character’s details. You can use roleplaying to challenge
not only the norms of Pathfinder’s fictional world, but
even real-life societal norms. Your character might
challenge gender notions, explore cultural identity, have a
disability, or any combination of these suggestions. Your
character can live any life you see fit.
Faith
Perhaps you’d like to play a character who is a devout
follower of a specific deity. Pathfinder is a rich world with
myriad faiths and philosophies spanning a wide range,
from Cayden Cailean, the Drunken Hero of good-hearted
adventuring; to Desna, the Song of Spheres and goddess of
dreaming and the stars; to Iomedae, the Inheritor, goddess
of honor, justice, and rulership. Pathfinder’s major deities
appear on pages 437–440. Your character might be so
drawn to a particular faith that you decide they should be a
champion or cleric of that deity; they might instead be a lay
worshipper who applies their faith’s teachings to daily life,
or simply the child of devout parents.
Your Allies
You might want to coordinate with other players when
forming your character concept. Your characters could
have something in common already; perhaps they are
relatives, or travelers from the same village. You might
discuss mechanical aspects with the other players, creating
characters whose combat abilities complement each
other. In the latter case, it can be helpful for a party to
include characters who deal damage, characters who can
absorb damage, and characters who can provide healing.
However, Pathfinder’s classes include a lot of choices, and
there are many options for building each type of character,
so don’t let these broad categories restrict your decisions.
CHARACTER SHEET
Once you’ve developed your character’s concept, jot down
a few sentences summarizing your ideas under the Notes
section on the third page of your character sheet. Record
any of the details you’ve already decided, such as your
character’s name, on the appropriate lines on the first page.
ANCESTRIES AND CLASSES
Each player takes a different approach to creating a
character. Some want a character who will fit well into the
story, while others look for a combination of abilities that
complement each other mechanically. You might combine
these two approaches. There is no wrong way!
When you turn the page, you’ll see a graphical
representation of ancestries and classes that provide at-aglance information for players looking to make the most of
their starting ability scores. In the ancestries overview on
page 22, each entry lists which ability scores it boosts, and
also indicates any ability flaws the ancestry might have.
You can find more about ability boosts and ability flaws in
Ability Scores on page 20.
The summaries of the classes on pages 22–23 list each
class’s key ability score—the ability score used to calculate
the potency of many of their class abilities. Characters
receive an ability boost in that ability score when you choose
their class. This summary also lists one or more secondary
ability scores important to members of that class.
Keep in mind a character’s background also affects their
ability scores, though there’s more flexibility in the ability
boosts from backgrounds than in those from classes. For
descriptions of the available backgrounds, see pages 60–64.
Introduction 1
21
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Ancestries
DWARF ELF GNOME GOBLIN HALFLING HUMAN
Dwarves are a
short, stocky
people who are
often stubborn,
fierce, and devoted.
Elves are a tall,
slender, long-lived
people with a
strong tradition of
art and magic.
Gnomes are
short and hardy
folk, with an
unquenchable
curiosity and
eccentric habits.
Goblins are a
short, scrappy,
energetic people
who have spent
millennia maligned
and feared.
Halflings are a
short, adaptable
people who
exhibit remarkable
curiosity and
humor.
Humans are
incredibly diverse.
Some, such as
half-elves and
half-orcs, even
have non-human
ancestors.
Ability Boosts
Constitution,
Wisdom, free
Dexterity,
Intelligence, free
Constitution,
Charisma, free
Dexterity,
Charisma, free
Dexterity,
Wisdom, free
Two free ability
boosts
Ability flaw
Charisma Constitution Strength Wisdom Strength —
Classes
ALCHEMIST BARBARIAN BARD CHAMPION
The alchemist throws
alchemical bombs and
drinks concoctions of their
own making.
The barbarian flies into
a rage on the battlefield,
smashing foes with abandon.
Skilled performances and
secrets of the occult enable
the bard to distract foes and
inspire allies.
A warrior dedicated to a
deity, the champion uses
divine power to enhance their
abilities and protect allies.
Key Ability Score*
Intelligence Strength Charisma Strength
Secondary Ability Scores
Constitution, Dexterity Constitution, Dexterity Constitution, Dexterity Charisma, Constitution
Core Rulebook
22
Classes
CLERIC DRUID FIGHTER MONK
The cleric calls on the power
of a deity to cast spells that
can heal allies or harm foes.
The druid uses the magic of
the natural world to bolster
allies and strike down enemies.
The fighter is a master
of weapons, martial
techniques, and powerful
attack combinations.
The monk wields the
secrets of martial arts
in dazzling displays of
battlefield prowess.
Key Ability Score*
Wisdom Wisdom Dexterity or Strength Dexterity or Strength
Secondary Ability Scores
Charisma, Constitution Constitution, Dexterity Constitution Constitution, Wisdom
Classes
RANGER ROGUE SORCERER WIZARD
The ranger is a master of
using their surroundings,
traps, and animal allies to
harry enemies.
The rogue is a multitalented
master of skulduggery who
strikes when enemies least
expect it.
The sorcerer’s magical might
flows from their blood and
manifests as fantastic spells
and abilities.
The wizard is a scholar
whose reservoirs of arcane
knowledge powers their
wondrous spells and abilities.
Key Ability Score*
Dexterity or Strength Dexterity or other Charisma Intelligence
Secondary Ability Scores
Constitution, Wisdom Charisma, Constitution Dexterity, Constitution Dexterity, Constitution
* A character receives an ability boost to their class’s key ability score.
Introduction 1
23
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Speed, and languages, and contributes to their Hit Points.
Each also grants ability boosts and ability flaws to represent
the ancestry’s basic capabilities.
You’ll make four decisions when you select your
character’s ancestry:
• Pick the ancestry itself.
• Assign any free ability boosts and decide if you are
taking any voluntary flaws.
• Select a heritage from those available within that
ancestry, further defining the traits your character
was born with.
• Choose an ancestry feat, representing an ability your
hero learned at an early age.
CHARACTER SHEET
Write your character’s ancestry and heritage in the
appropriate space at the top of your character sheet’s first
page. Adjust your ability scores, adding 2 to an ability
score if you gained an ability boost from your ancestry, and
subtracting 2 from an ability score if you gained an ability
flaw from your ancestry. Note the number of Hit Points your
character gains from their ancestry—you’ll add more to this
number later. Finally, in the appropriate spaces, record your
character’s size, Speed, and languages. If your character’s
ancestry provides them with special abilities, write them
in the appropriate spaces, such as darkvision in the Senses
2 Step 2
Start Building
Ability Scores
At this point, you need to start building your character’s
ability scores. See the overview of ability scores on pages
19–20 for more information about these important
aspects of your character and an overview of the process.
Your character’s ability scores each start at 10, and as
you select your ancestry, background, and class, you’ll apply
ability boosts, which increase a score by 2, and ability flaws,
which decrease a score by 2. At this point, just note a 10 in
each ability score and familiarize yourself with the rules for
ability boosts and flaws on page 20. This is also a good time
to identify which ability scores will be most important to
your character. See The Six Ability Scores on page 19 and
the class summaries on pages 22–23 for more information.
3 Step 3
Select an Ancestry
Select an ancestry for your character. The ancestry
summaries on page 22 provide an overview of Pathfinder’s
core ancestry options, and each is fully detailed in
Chapter  2. Ancestry determines your character’s size,
Hit Points
Perception
Skills
Armor Class
Saving Throws
DECEPTION
PERFORMANCE
ATHLETICS
NATURE
INTIMIDATION
SOCIETY
SURVIVAL
ARCANA
ACROBATICS
MEDICINE
DIPLOMACY
RELIGION
CRAFTING
OCCULTISM
LORE
STEALTH
THIEVERY
LORE
RESISTANCES AND IMMUNITIES
CONDITIONS
PROF ITEM T E M L
MAX HP BT CURRENT HP
REFLEX
ITEM
DEX PROF
WILL
ITEM
WIS PROF
T E M L T E M L T E M L
T E M L
FORTITUDE
ITEM
CON PROF
WIS PROF ITEM
DYING WOUNDED
CURRENT TEMPORARY
Languages
Class DC
DEX CAP
OR 10
DC BASE
=
T E M L KEY PROF ITEM
Weapon Proficiencies
T E M L SIMPLE T E M L OTHER T E M L OTHER T E M L MARTIAL
10
DC BASE
=
STR
MODIFIER
STRENGTH SCORE
DEX
MODIFIER
DEXTERITY SCORE
CON
MODIFIER
CONSTITUTION SCORE
INT
MODIFIER
INTELLIGENCE SCORE
WIS
MODIFIER
WISDOM SCORE
CHA
MODIFIER
CHARISMA SCORE
Melee Strikes Weapon
P
S
B
STR PROF
= T E M L ITEM
Damage
DICE STR W SPEC OTHER TRAITS
Weapon
P
S
B
STR PROF
= T E M L ITEM
Damage
DICE STR W SPEC OTHER TRAITS
Weapon
P
S
B
STR PROF
= T E M L ITEM
Damage
DICE STR W SPEC OTHER TRAITS
Weapon
P
S
B
DEX PROF
= T E M L ITEM
Damage
DICE SPECIAL W SPEC OTHER TRAITS
Weapon
P
S
B
DEX PROF
= T E M L ITEM
Damage
DICE SPECIAL W SPEC OTHER TRAITS
Weapon
P
S
B
DEX PROF
= T E M L ITEM
Damage
DICE SPECIAL W SPEC OTHER TRAITS
Ranged Strikes
SENSES NOTES
speed feet MOVEMENT TYPES & NOTES
UNARMORED
T E M L
MEDIUM
T E M L
LIGHT
T E M L
HEAVY
T E M L
= T E M L INT PROF ITEM
= T E M L STR PROF ITEM
= T E M L INT PROF ITEM
= T E M L CHA PROF ITEM
= T E M L CHA PROF ITEM
= T E M L CHA PROF ITEM
= T E M L INT PROF ITEM
= T E M L INT PROF ITEM
= T E M L WIS PROF ITEM
= T E M L WIS PROF ITEM
= T E M L INT PROF ITEM
= T E M L CHA PROF ITEM
= T E M L WIS PROF ITEM
= T E M L INT PROF ITEM
= T E M L WIS PROF ITEM
= T E M L DEX PROF ITEM
= T E M L DEX PROF ITEM
= T E M L DEX PROF ITEM
Ability Scores
HARDNESS
Permission granted to photocopy for personal use only.
Character Sheet PROFICIENCY
Untrained +0
Trained 2+Level
Expert 4+Level
Master 6+Level
Legendary 8+Level
[one-action] Single Action
[two-actions] Two-Action Activity
[three-actions] Three-Action Activity
[free-action] Free Action
[reaction] Reaction
Player
Name
Experience
Points (XP)
Character
Name
Shield
Ancestry and Heritage
Background
Class
Size Alignment Traits
Deity
Level
Hero Points
+
= MAX
AC
ARMOR
-
ARMOR
-
ARMOR
-
ARMOR
-
CharacterSheet.indd 580 3/25/19 3:12 PM
10
7
5
3 7
3 7 9
7 10
7 9
7 9
3
8 9
2 3 4
5 6
10
3 4 5 10
Core Rulebook
24
SPECIAL 1st FEATURE 1st
FEAT 6th
FEATURE 13th
BACKGROUND
FEAT 1st FEAT 1st
FEAT 8th
FEATURE 15th
4th
FEAT 9th FEATURE 3rd
FEAT 10th
FEATURE 17th
8th
16th
11th
HERITAGE 1st FEATURE 1st
FEATURE 7th
FEAT 14th
2nd
FEAT 2nd
FEATURE 9th
FEAT 16th
6th
14th
7th
FEAT 13th FEAT 4th
FEATURE 11th
FEAT 18th
10th
18th
15th
FEAT 17th FEATURE 5th
FEAT 5th
FEAT 12th
FEATURE 19th
FEAT 20th
12th
3rd
20th
19th
READIED ITEMS BULK OTHER ITEMS BULK
Ancestry Feats and Abilities Class Feats and Abilities
Skill Feats
General Feats
Bonus Feats
Inventory
WORN ITEMS
ENCUMBERED
= 5 MAXIMUM
STR
STR
=
BASE
BASE
10
INVEST BULK
(MAX 10)
Permission granted to photocopy for personal use only.
CP SP GP PP
BULK
CharacterSheet.indd 581 3/25/19 1:59 PM
section on the first page and innate spells on the fourth
page. Write the ancestry feat you selected in the Ancestry
Feat section on your character sheet’s second page.
4 Step 4
Pick a Background
Your character’s background might represent their
upbringing, an aptitude they’ve been honing since their
youth, or another aspect of their life before they became an
adventurer. Character backgrounds appear in Chapter 2,
starting on page 60. They typically provide two ability
boosts (one that can be applied to either of two specific
ability scores, and one that is free), training in a specific
skill, training in a Lore skill, and a specific skill feat.
CHARACTER SHEET
Record your character’s background in the space at the
top of the first page of your character sheet. Adjust
your ability scores, adding 2 to an ability score if you
gained an ability boost from your background. Record
the skill feat the background provides in the Skill Feat
section of your character sheet’s second page. On the
first page, check the “T” box next to the name of the
specific skill and for one Lore skill to indicate your
character is trained, then write the name of the Lore
skill granted by your background.
5 Step 5
Choose a Class
At this point, you need to decide your character’s class.
A class gives your character access to a suite of heroic
abilities, determines how effectively they fight, and
governs how easily they can shake off or avoid certain
harmful effects. Each class is fully detailed in Chapter 3,
but the summaries on pages 22–23 provide an overview
of each and tells you which ability scores are important
when playing that class.
You don’t need to write down all of your character’s
class features yet. You simply need to know which class
you want to play, which determines the ability scores that
will be most important for your character.
CHARACTER SHEET
Write your character’s class in the space at the top of the
first page of your character sheet, then write “1” in the
Level box to indicate that your character is 1st level. Next
to the ability scores, note the class’s key ability score,
and add 2 to that ability score from the ability boost the
4
3
7
8
10
Introduction 1
25
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
OPTIONAL:
VOLUNTARY FLAWS
Sometimes, it’s fun to play a
character with a major flaw even
if you’re not playing an ancestry
that imposes one. You can elect
to take two additional ability
flaws when applying the ability
boosts and ability flaws from
your ancestry. If you do, you can
also apply one additional free
ability boost. These ability flaws
can be assigned to any ability
score you like, but you can’t apply
more than one ability flaw to the
same ability score during this
step unless you apply both of the
additional ability flaws to a score
that is already receiving an ability
boost during this step. In this
case, the first ability flaw cancels
the ability boost, and the second
ability flaw decreases the score
by 2. Likewise, as an exception
to the normal rules for ability
boosts, you can apply two free
ability boosts to an ability score
receiving an ability flaw during
this step; the first ability boost
cancels the ability flaw, and the
second ability boost increases the
score by 2. For example, a dwarf
normally gets an ability boost to
Constitution and Wisdom, along
with an ability flaw to Charisma.
You could apply one ability flaw
each to Intelligence and Strength,
or you could apply both ability
flaws to Wisdom. You could not
apply either additional ability flaw
to Charisma, though, because it is
already receiving dwarves’ ability
flaw during this step.
class provides. Don’t worry about recording the rest of your character’s class features
and abilities yet—you’ll handle that in Step 7.
6 Step 6
Determine Ability Scores
Now that you’ve made the main mechanical choices about your character, it’s time
to finalize their ability scores. Do these three things:
• First, make sure you’ve applied all the ability boosts and ability flaws you’ve
noted in previous steps (from your ancestry, background, and class).
• Then, apply four more ability boosts to your character’s ability scores,
choosing a different ability score for each and increasing that ability score
by 2.
• Finally, record your starting ability scores and ability modifiers, as determined
using Table 1–1: Ability Modifiers.
Remember that each ability boost adds 2 to the base score of 10, and each ability
flaw subtracts 2. You should have no ability score lower than 8 or higher than 18.
CHARACTER SHEET
Write your character’s starting ability scores in the box provided for each. Record
the ability modifier for each ability score in the box to the left of the ability’s name.
7 Step 7
Record Class Details
Now, record all the benefits and class features that your character receives from the
class you’ve chosen. While you’ve already noted your key ability score, you’ll want to
be sure to record the following class features.
• To determine your character’s total starting Hit Points, add together the
number of Hit Points your character gains from their ancestry (chosen in
Step 2) and the number of Hit Points they gain from their class.
• The Initial Proficiencies section of your class entry indicates your character’s
starting proficiency ranks in a number of areas. Choose which skills your
character is trained in and record those, along with the ones set by your class. If
your class would make you trained in a skill you’re already trained in (typically
due to your background), you can select another skill to become trained in.
• See the class advancement table in your class entry to learn the class features
your character gains at 1st level—but remember, you already chose an
ancestry and background. Some class features require you to make additional
choices, such as selecting spells.
CHARACTER SHEET
Write your character’s total Hit Points on the first page of your character sheet. Use
the proficiency fields (the boxes marked “T,” “E,” “M,” and “L”) on your character sheet to
record your character’s initial proficiencies in Perception, saving throws, and the skills
granted by their class; mark “T” if your character is trained, or “E” if your character is
expert. Indicate which additional skills you chose for your character to be trained in
by marking the “T” proficiency box for each skill you selected. Likewise, record your
character’s their armor proficiencies in the Armor Class section at the top of the first
page and their weapon proficiencies at the bottom of the first page. Record all other
class feats and abilities on the second page. Don’t worry yet about finalizing any values
for your character’s statistics—you’ll handle that in Step 9.
Core Rulebook
26
SPELLS AND
SPELLCASTING
Most classes can learn to cast a
few focus spells, but the bard,
cleric, druid, sorcerer, and wizard
all gain spellcasting—the ability
to cast a wide variety of spells.
If your character’s class grants
spells, you should take time
during Step 7 to learn about the
spells they know and how to
cast them. The fourth page of the
character sheet provides space
to note your character’s magic
tradition and their proficiency
rank for spell attack rolls and
spell DCs. It also gives ample
space to record the spells in
your character’s repertoire or
spellbook, or that you prepare
frequently. Each class determines
which spells a character can
cast, how they are cast, and how
many they can cast in a day,
but the spells themselves and
detailed rules for spellcasting are
located in Chapter 7.
8 Step 8
Buy Equipment
At 1st level, your character has 15 gold pieces (150 silver pieces) to spend on
armor, weapons, and other basic equipment. Your character’s class lists the types
of weapons and armor with which they are trained (or better!). Their weapons
determine how much damage they deal in combat, and their armor influences their
Armor Class; these calculations are covered in more detail in Step 10. Don’t forget
essentials such as food and traveling gear! For more on the available equipment and
how much it costs, see Chapter 6.
CHARACTER SHEET
Once you’ve spent your character’s starting wealth, calculate any remaining gp, sp,
and cp they might still have and write those amounts in Inventory on the second
page. Record your character’s weapons in the Melee Strikes and Ranged Strikes
sections of the first page, depending on the weapon, and the rest of their equipment
in the Inventory section on your character sheet’s second page. You’ll calculate
specific numbers for melee Strikes and ranged Strikes with the weapons in Step 9
and for AC when wearing that armor in Step 10.
9 Step 9
Calculate Modifiers
With most of the big decisions for your character made, it’s time to calculate the
modifiers for each of the following statistics. If your proficiency rank for a statistic is
trained, expert, master, and legendary, your bonus equals your character’s level plus
another number based on the rank (2, 4, 6, and 8, respectively). If your character is
untrained, your proficiency bonus is +0.
Perception
Your character’s Perception modifier measures how alert they are. This modifier is
equal to their proficiency bonus in Perception plus their Wisdom modifier. For more
about Perception, see page 448.
Saving Throws
For each kind of saving throw, add your character’s Fortitude, Reflex, or Will
proficiency bonus (as appropriate) plus the ability modifier associated with that
kind of saving throw. For Fortitude saving throws, use your character’s Constitution
modifier. For Reflex saving throws, use your character’s Dexterity modifier. For Will
saving throws, use your character’s Wisdom modifier. Then add in any bonuses or
penalties from abilities, feats, or items that always apply (but not modifiers, bonuses,
or penalties that apply only in certain situations). Record this number on the line for
that saving throw.
Melee Strikes and Ranged Strikes
Next to where you’ve written your character’s melee and ranged weapons, calculate
the modifier to Strike with each weapon and how much damage that Strike deals. The
modifier for a Strike is equal to your character’s proficiency bonus with the weapon plus
an ability modifier (usually Strength for melee Strikes and Dexterity for ranged Strikes).
You also add any item bonus from the weapon and any other permanent bonuses or
penalties. You also need to calculate how much damage each weapon’s Strike deals.
Melee weapons usually add your character’s Strength modifier to damage rolls, while
ranged weapons might add some or all of your character’s Strength modifier, depending
on the weapon’s traits. See the weapon entries in Chapter 6 for more information.
Introduction 1
27
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Skills
In the second box to the right of each skill name on your
character sheet, there’s an abbreviation that reminds you
of the ability score tied to that skill. For each skill in which
your character is trained, add your proficiency bonus for
that skill (typically +3 for a 1st-level character) to the
indicated ability’s modifier, as well as any other applicable
bonuses and penalties, to determine the total modifier for
that skill. For skills your character is untrained in, use the
same method, but your proficiency bonus is +0.
CHARACTER SHEET
For Perception and saving throws, write your proficiency
bonus and the appropriate ability modifier in the boxes
provided, then record the total modifier in the large space.
Record the proficiency bonuses, ability modifiers, and total
modifiers for your melee Strikes and ranged Strikes in the
box after the name of each weapon, and put the damage
for each in the space below, along with the traits for that
attack. For skills, record the relevant ability modifier and
proficiency bonus in the appropriate box for each skill, and
then write the total skill modifiers in the spaces to the left.
If your character has any modifiers, bonuses, or
penalties from feats or abilities that always apply, add
them into the total modifiers. For ones that apply only in
certain situations, note them next to the total modifiers.
10 Step 10
Finishing Details
Now add the following details to your character sheet in
the appropriate spaces.
Alignment
Your character’s alignment is an indicator of their
morality and personality. There are nine possible
alignments in Pathfinder, as shown on Table 1–2: The
Nine Alignments. If your alignment has any components
other than neutral, your character gains the traits of those
alignment components. This might affect the way various
spells, items, and creatures interact with your character.
Your character’s alignment is measured by two pairs of
opposed values: the axis of good and evil and the axis of
law and chaos. A character who isn’t committed strongly
to either side is neutral on that axis. Keep in mind that
alignment is a complicated subject, and even acts that might
be considered good can be used for nefarious purposes, and
vice versa. The GM is the arbiter of questions about how
specific actions might affect your character’s alignment.
If you play a champion, your character’s alignment
must be one allowed for their deity and cause
(pages 437–440 and 106–107), and if you play a cleric,
your character’s alignment must be one allowed for their
deity (pages 437–440).
Core Rulebook
28
Good and Evil
Your character has a good alignment if they consider the
happiness of others above their own and work selflessly to
assist others, even those who aren’t friends and family. They
are also good if they value protecting others from harm,
even if doing so puts the character in danger. Your character
has an evil alignment if they’re willing to victimize others
for their own selfish gain, and even more so if they enjoy
inflicting harm. If your character falls somewhere in the
middle, they’re likely neutral on this axis.
Law and Chaos
Your character has a lawful alignment if they value
consistency, stability, and predictability over flexibility.
Lawful characters have a set system in life, whether it’s
meticulously planning day-to-day activities, carefully
following a set of official or unofficial laws, or strictly
adhering to a code of honor. On the other hand, if your
character values flexibility, creativity, and spontaneity over
consistency, they have a chaotic alignment—though this
doesn’t mean they make decisions by choosing randomly.
Chaotic characters believe that lawful characters are too
inflexible to judge each situation by its own merits or take
advantage of opportunities, while lawful characters believe
that chaotic characters are irresponsible and flighty.
Many characters are in the middle, obeying the law
or following a code of conduct in many situations, but
bending the rules when the situation requires it. If your
character is in the middle, they are neutral on this axis.
Changing Alignment
Alignment can change during play as a character’s beliefs
change, or as you realize that your character’s actions
reflect a different alignment than the one on your character
sheet. In most cases, you can just change their alignment
and continue playing. However, if you play a cleric or
champion and your character’s alignment changes to one
not allowed for their deity (or cause, for champions), your
character loses some of their class abilities until they atone
(as described in the class).
Deity
Write down the deity your character worships, if any.
Champions and clerics must worship a deity. See pages
437–440 for more about Pathfinder’s deities.
Age
Decide your character’s age and note it on the third page
of the character sheet. The description for your character’s
ancestry in Chapter 2 gives some guidance on the age
ranges of members of that ancestry. Beyond that, you can
play a character of whatever age you like. There aren’t
any mechanical adjustments to your character for being
particularly old, but you might want to take it into account
when considering your starting ability scores and future
advancement. Particularly young characters can change
the tone of some of the game’s threats, so it’s recommended
that characters are at least young adults.
Gender and Pronouns
Characters of all genders are equally likely to become
adventurers. Record your character’s gender, if applicable,
and their pronouns on the third page of the character sheet.
Class DC
A class DC sets the difficulty for certain abilities granted
by your character’s class. This DC equals 10 plus their
proficiency bonus for their class DC (+3 for most 1st-level
characters) plus the modifier for the class’s key ability score.
Hero Points
Your character usually begins each game session with
1 Hero Point, and you can gain additional Hero Points
during sessions by performing heroic deeds or devising
clever strategies. Your character can use Hero Points to
gain certain benefits, such as staving off death or rerolling
a d20. See page 467 for more about Hero Points.
Armor Class (AC)
Your character’s Armor Class represents how difficult they
are to hit in combat. To calculate your AC, add 10 plus
your character’s Dexterity modifier (up to their armor’s
Dexterity modifier cap; page 274), plus their proficiency
bonus with their armor, plus their armor’s item bonus to
AC and any other permanent bonuses and penalties.
Bulk
Your character’s maximum Bulk determines how much
weight they can comfortably carry. If they’re carrying a total
amount of Bulk that exceeds 5 plus their Strength modifier,
they are encumbered. A character can’t carry a total amount
of Bulk that exceeds 10 plus their Strength modifier. The
Bulk your character is carrying equals the sum of all of their
items; keep in mind that 10 light items make up 1 Bulk. You
can find out more about Bulk in Chapter 6: Equipment.
TABLE 1–2: THE NINE ALIGNMENTS
Good Neutral Evil
Lawful
Lawful
Good
(LG)
Lawful
Neutral
(LN)
Lawful
Evil
(LE)
Neutral
Neutral
Good
(NG)
True
Neutral
(N)
Neutral
Evil
(NE)
Chaotic
Chaotic
Good
(CG)
Chaotic
Neutral
(CN)
Chaotic
Evil
(CE)
Introduction 1
29
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Sample Character
This step-by-step example illustrates the process of
creating a Pathfinder character.
Steps 1 and 2
Adam is making his first Pathfinder character. After
talking about it with the rest of the group, he’s decided to
make a dwarven druid. After jotting down a few ideas, he
begins by writing down a 10 for each ability score.
Step 3
Adam looks up the dwarf entry in Chapter 2. He records
the ability boosts to his Constitution and Wisdom scores
(bringing both up to 12). He also applies the ability flaw
to his Charisma, dropping it to 8. For his free ability
boost, he chooses Dexterity to boost his defenses, raising
it to 12 as well. He also records the 10 Hit Points the
ancestry gives him. Next, he returns to his character
sheet to record the size, Speed, language, and darkvision
ability he gets from being a dwarf. Finally, he decides on
a heritage, writing “rock dwarf” next to dwarf, and he
picks an ancestry feat, deciding on Rock Runner, to show
his character’s strong connection to stone.
Step 4
Looking through the backgrounds, Adam likes the idea
of a solitary dwarven druid, and the nomad background
makes for a good choice. For the first ability boost
granted by the background, Adam chooses Wisdom, and
for the free ability boost, he choses Constitution, taking
both up to 14. On the second page, he writes “Assurance
(Survival)” in the Skill Feats area, on the Background line.
Finally, returning to the first page, he writes “cave” next
to the first Lore skill entry and checks the box under the
“T” for that skill and Survival.
Step 5
Adam writes “druid” on the class line of his character sheet
and fills in the number 1 in the level box. The druid class
grants an ability boost to its key ability score, which is
Wisdom, so Adam’s character has his Wisdom raised to 16.
Step 6
Adam applies four more ability boosts to his ability
scores to determine his starting scores. After giving it
some thought, he applies them to Wisdom (raising it
to 18), since that’s the most important ability score for
his class, and to Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution
(raising them to 12, 14, and 16, respectively) to make him
better in combat. He then looks at Table 1–1 to determine
the ability modifiers for each score and writes all of his
ability scores and modifiers down on his character sheet.
Step 7
As Adam applies his class, he has a number of things to
figure out. First, he starts by recording all of his initial
proficiencies, marking the appropriate boxes in the
Armor Class, Saving Throws, Weapon Proficiencies, Spell
Attack Roll, and Spell DCs areas of his sheet. Turning to
skills, he marks Nature as trained and notes that once he
picks his druid order, he’ll become trained in another skill
determined by that order. He then gets to choose three
more skills (if he had a higher Intelligence, he would have
gotten more). He decides on Athletics, Diplomacy, and
Medicine, marking all of them as trained. Next, he adds
the 8 Hit Points from the druid class and his Constitution
modifier of +3 to the 10 Hit Points from his dwarf
ancestry for an impressive 21 total Hit Points.
Moving on to class features, Adam marks down wild
empathy in the class feats and abilities area, as well as the
Shield Block feat in the bonus feats area. He makes note of
the anathema for being a druid and records Druidic in his
language section. Next, he looks through the druid orders
and decides upon the wild order, which gives him his final
trained skill (Intimidation), the ability to cast wild morph,
as well as the Wild Shape feat, which lets him cast a spell
to turn into an animal. He writes these spells in the focus
spell area of his character sheet and also notes that he has
1 Focus Point to use to cast these spells.
Finally, a druid can cast a limited number of primal
spells. Although he can change them every morning, Adam
is curious, and he turns to Chapter 7: Spells to decide
what spells he might cast. He jots down five cantrips and
two 1st-level spells and marks them as prepared.
Step 8
Next up, Adam turns to Chapter 6: Equipment. He’s
trained in medium armor, but since wearing metal armor is
anathema to druids, he chooses hide armor. For weapons,
he decides on a spear, but he buys two just in case he wants
to throw the first one. He writes all of these on the front of
his character sheet. Adam lists the spear under both melee
Strikes and ranged Strikes, and he also writes the claws he
gains from wild morph under his melee Strikes, because
he’s sure that he’ll be casting that spell a lot. He records the
rest of his gear in the Inventory section on the second page,
along with coin left over after buying his starting gear.
Step 9
Adam records all of the ability modifiers for Perception,
saving throws, Strikes, and skills. He then puts a “+3” in
the box marked Prof to indicate his proficiency bonus
for each statistic he’s trained in (1 for his level, plus 2 for
being trained) and "+5" in any that he is an expert. Then,
he adds up his modifiers for each statistic.
Step 10
Finally, Adam fills out the final details of his character,
noting his neutral alignment and calculating his AC and
Bulk limits. Last but not least, he fills in some last-minute
information about his character and decides on a name.
Gar the dwarf druid is ready for his first adventure!
Core Rulebook
30
Leveling Up
The world of Pathfinder is a dangerous place, and your
character will face terrifying beasts and deadly traps on
their journey into legend. With each challenge resolved,
a character earns Experience Points (XP) that allow
them to increase in level. Each level grants greater skill,
increased resiliency, and new capabilities, allowing your
character to face even greater challenges and go on to
earn even more impressive rewards.
Each time your character reaches 1,000 Experience
Points, their level increases by 1. On your character
sheet, indicate your character’s new level beside the
name of their class, and deduct 1,000 XP from their XP
total. If you have any Experience Points left after this,
record them—they count toward your next level, so your
character is already on their way to advancing yet again!
Next, return to your character’s class entry. Increase
your character’s total Hit Points by the number indicated
for your class. Then, take a look at the class advancement
table and find the row for your character’s new level.
Your character gains all the abilities listed for that
level, including new abilities specific to your class and
additional benefits all characters gain as they level up.
For example, all characters gain four ability boosts at 5th
level and every 5 levels thereafter.
You can find all the new abilities specific to your class,
including class feats, right in your class entry, though you
can also use class feats to take an archetype (page 219).
Your character’s class entry also explains how to apply
any ability boosts and skill increases your character gains.
If they gain an ancestry feat, head back to the entry for
your character’s ancestry in Chapter 2 and select another
ancestry feat from the list of options. If they gain a skill
increase, refer to Chapter 4 when deciding which skill
to apply it to. If they gain a general feat or a skill feat,
you can choose from the feats listed in Chapter 5. If they
can cast spells, see the class entry for details on adding
spell slots and spells. It’s also a good idea to review
your character’s spells in Chapter 7 and see if there are
heightened versions they can now cast.
Once you’ve made all your choices for your
character’s new level, be sure to go over your character
sheet and adjust any values that have changed. At a bare
minimum, your proficiency bonuses all increase by 1
because you’ve gained a level, so your AC, attack rolls,
Perception, saving throws, skill modifiers, spell attack
rolls, and class DC all increase by at least 1. You might
need to change other values because of skill increases,
ability boosts, or class features that either increase your
proficiency rank or increase other statistics at certain
levels. If an ability boost increases your character’s
Constitution modifier, recalculate their maximum Hit
Points using their new Constitution modifier (typically
this adds 1 Hit Point per level). If an ability boost
increases your character’s Intelligence modifier, they
become trained in an additional skill and language.
Some feats grant a benefit based on your level, such
as Toughness, and these benefits are adjusted whenever
you gain a level as well.
You can perform the steps in the leveling-up process in
whichever order you want. For example, if you wanted
to take the skill feat Intimidating Prowess as your skill
feat at 10th level, but your character’s Strength score
was only 14, you could first increase their Strength score
to 16 using the ability boosts gained at 10th level, and
then take Intimidating Prowess as a skill feat at the
same level.
Leveling-Up Checklist
Every time you gain a level, make sure you do each of
the following:
• Increase your level by 1 and subtract 1,000 XP
from your XP total.
• Increase your maximum Hit Points by the amount
listed in your class entry in Chapter 3.
• Add class features from your class advancement
table, including ability boosts and skill increases.
• Select feats as indicated on your class advancement
table. For ancestry feats, see Chapter 2. For class
feats, see your class entry in Chapter 3. For general
feats and skill feats, see Chapter 5.
• Add spells and spell slots if your class grants
spellcasting. See Chapter 7 for spells.
• Increase all of your proficiency bonuses by 1
from your new level, and make other increases to
your proficiency bonuses as necessary from skill
increases or other class features. Increase any
other statistics that changed as a result of ability
boosts or other abilities.
• Adjust bonuses from feats and other abilities that
are based on your level.
Introduction 1
31
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Core Rulebook
32
Chapter 2: Ancestries & Backgrounds
Your character’s ancestry determines which people they call their own, whether it’s diverse
and ambitious humans, insular but vivacious elves, traditionalist and family-focused
dwarves, or any of the other folk who call Golarion home. A character’s ancestry and their
experiences prior to their life as an adventurer—represented by a background—might be
key parts of their identity, shape how they see the world, and help them find their place in it.
A character has one ancestry and one background, both
of which you select during character creation. You’ll also
select a number of languages for your character. Once
chosen, your ancestry and background can’t be changed.
This chapter is divided into three parts:
• Ancestries express the culture your character hails
from. Within many ancestries are heritages—
subgroups that each have their own characteristics.
An ancestry provides ability boosts (and perhaps
ability flaws), Hit Points, ancestry feats, and
sometimes additional abilities.
• Backgrounds, starting on page 60, describe training
or environments your character experienced
before becoming an adventurer. Your character’s
background provides ability boosts, skill training,
and a skill feat.
• Languages, starting on page 65, let your character
communicate with the wonderful and weird
people and creatures of the world.
Ancestry Entries
Each entry includes details about the ancestry and
presents the rules elements described below (all of these
but heritages and ancestry feats are listed in a sidebar).
Hit Points
This tells you how many Hit Points your character gains
from their ancestry at 1st level. You’ll add the Hit Points
from your character’s class (including their Constitution
modifier) to this number. For more on calculating Hit
Points, see Step 7: Record Class Details, on page 25.
Size
This tells you the physical size of members of the ancestry.
Medium corresponds roughly to the height and weight
range of a human adult, and Small is roughly half that.
Speed
This entry lists how far a member of the ancestry can move
each time they spend an action (such as Stride) to do so.
Ability Boosts
This lists the ability scores you apply ability boosts to
when creating a character of this ancestry. Most ancestries
provide ability boosts to two specified ability scores, plus
a free ability boost that you can apply to any other score
of your choice. For more about ability boosts, see page 20.
Ability Flaw
This lists the ability score to which you apply an ability
flaw when creating a character of this ancestry. Most
ancestries, with the exception of humans, include an ability
flaw. For more about applying ability flaws, see page 20.
Languages
This tells you the languages that members of the ancestry
speak at 1st level. If your Intelligence modifier is +1 or
higher, you can select more languages from a list given
here. More about languages can be found on page 65.
Traits
These descriptors have no mechanical benefit, but they’re
important for determining how certain spells, effects, and
other aspects of the game interact with your character.
Special Abilities
Any other entries in the sidebar represent abilities, senses,
and other qualities all members of the ancestry manifest.
These are omitted for ancestries with no special rules.
Heritages
You select a heritage at 1st level to reflect abilities passed
down to you from your ancestors or common among
those of your ancestry in the environment where you were
born or grew up. You have only one heritage and can’t
change it later. A heritage is not the same as a culture or
ethnicity, though some cultures or ethnicities might have
more or fewer members from a particular heritage.
Ancestry Feats
This section presents ancestry feats, which allow you to
customize your character. You gain your first ancestry
feat at 1st level, and you gain another at 5th level, 9th
level, 13th level, and 17th level, as indicated in the class
advancement table in the descriptions of each class.
Ancestry feats are organized by level. As a starting
character, you can choose from only 1st-level ancestry
feats, but later choices can be made from any feat of
your level or lower. These feats also sometimes list
prerequisites—requirements that your character must
fulfill to select that feat.
2
33
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Dwarf
Dwarves have a well-earned reputation as a stoic and stern people, ensconced within citadels
and cities carved from solid rock. While some see them as dour and humorless crafters of
stone and metal, dwarves and those who have spent time among them understand their
unbridled zeal for their work, caring far more about quality than quantity. To a stranger,
they can seem untrusting and clannish, but to their friends and family, they are warm and
caring, their halls filled with the sounds of laughter and hammers hitting anvils.
If you want to play a character who is as hard as nails,
a stubborn and unrelenting adventurer, with a mix of
rugged toughness and deep wisdom—or at least dogged
conviction—you should play a dwarf.
You Might...
• Strive to uphold your personal honor, no matter
the situation.
• Appreciate quality craftsmanship in all forms and
insist upon it for all your gear.
• Don’t waver or back down once you’ve set your
mind to something.
Others Probably...
• See you as stubborn, though whether they see
this as an asset or a detriment changes from one
person to the next.
• Assume you are an expert in matters related to
stonework, mining, precious metals, and gems.
• Recognize the deep connection you have with your
family, heritage, and friends.
Physical Description
Dwarves are short and stocky, standing about a foot
shorter than most humans. They have wide, compact
bodies and burly frames. Dwarves of all genders pride
themselves on the length of their hair, which they often
braid into intricate patterns, some of which represent
specific clans. A long beard is a sign of masculinity and
honor among the dwarves, and thus a clean-shaven male
dwarf is considered weak, untrustworthy, or worse.
Dwarves typically reach physical adulthood around the
age of 25, though their traditionalist culture places more
value on completing coming of age ceremonies unique to
each clan than reaching a certain age. A typical dwarf can
live to around 350 years old.
Society
The ancient surface empire the dwarves once ruled fell
long ago, overwhelmed by orc and goblinoid enemies.
Today’s dwarves today retain many of the qualities that
propelled their people to greatness in ancient times:
fierceness, gumption, and stubbornness in endeavors
ranging from battle and craftsmanship to forging ties
with family and friends.
Dwarves are slow to trust those outside their kin, but
this wariness is not without reason. Dwarves have a long
history of forced exile from ancestral holds and struggles
against the depredations of savage foes, especially giants,
goblinoids, orcs, and the horrors that dwell deep below
the surface. While trust from a dwarf is hard-won, once
gained it is as strong as iron.
Core Rulebook
34
While the distance between their mountain Sky Citadels can create vast cultural
divides between various dwarf clans, most dwarven societies share a number of
similarities. Nearly all dwarven peoples share a passion for stonework, metalwork,
and gem-cutting. Most are highly skilled at architecture and mining, and many share
a hatred of giants, orcs, and goblinoids.
Few dwarves are seen without their clan dagger strapped to their belt. This dagger is
forged just before a dwarf’s birth and bears the gemstone of their clan. A parent uses this
dagger to cut the infant’s umbilical cord, making it the first weapon to taste their blood.
Alignment and Religion
Dwarves tend to value honor and closely follow the traditions of their clans and
kingdoms. They have a strong sense of friendship and justice, though they are often
very particular about who they consider a friend. They work hard and play harder—
especially when strong ale is involved.
The typical dwarf is lawful good or lawful neutral and prefers to worship deities of
those alignments. Torag, god of dwarvenkind, is the dwarves’ primary deity, though
worship of Torag’s family members is also common.
Names
Dwarves honor their children with names taken from ancestors or dwarven
heroes, and it’s quite rare to invent a new name or to borrow a name from
another culture for a child. When introducing themselves, dwarves tend to
list their family and clan, plus any number of other familial connections and
honorifics. Dwarven names usually contain hard consonants and are rarely more
or fewer than two syllables.
Sample Names
Agna, Bodill, Dolgrin, Edrukk, Grunyar, Ingra, Kazmuk, Kotri, Lupp, Morgrym,
Rogar, Rusilka, Torra, Yangrit
Dwarf Heritages
With their long family lines and hardy physiologies, dwarves take great pride in the
resilience their bloodlines provide. Choose one of the following dwarven heritages
at 1st level.
Ancient-Blooded Dwarf
Dwarven heroes of old could shrug off their enemies’ magic, and some of that
resistance manifests in you. You gain the Call on Ancient Blood reaction.
CALL ON ANCIENT BLOOD [reaction]
Trigger You attempt a saving throw against a magical effect, but you haven't rolled yet.
Your ancestors’ innate resistance to magic surges, before slowly ebbing down. You gain a +1
circumstance bonus to the triggering saving throw and until the end of this turn.
Death Warden Dwarf
Your ancestors have been tomb guardians for generations, and the power they
cultivated to ward off necromancy has passed on to you. If you roll a success on a
saving throw against a necromancy effect, you get a critical success instead.
Forge Dwarf
You have a remarkable adaptation to hot environments from ancestors who inhabited
blazing deserts or volcanic chambers beneath the earth. This grants you fire resistance
equal to half your level (minimum 1), and you treat environmental heat effects as
if they were one step less extreme (incredible heat becomes extreme, extreme heat
becomes severe, and so on).
Hit Points
10
Size
Medium
Speed
20 feet
Ability Boosts
Constitution
Wisdom
Free
Ability Flaw
Charisma
Languages
Common
Dwarven
Additional languages equal to
your Intelligence modifier (if it’s
positive). Choose from Gnomish,
Goblin, Jotun, Orcish, Terran,
Undercommon, and any other
languages to which you have
access (such as the languages
prevalent in your region).
Traits
Dwarf
Humanoid
Darkvision
You can see in darkness and
dim light just as well as you can
see in bright light, though your
vision in darkness is in black
and white.
Ancestries & backgrounds 2
35
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Rock Dwarf
Your ancestors lived and worked among the great ancient
stones of the mountains or the depths of the earth. This
makes you solid as a rock when you plant your feet. You
gain a +2 circumstance bonus to your Fortitude or Reflex
DC against attempts to Shove or Trip you. This bonus
also applies to saving throws against spells or effects that
attempt to knock you prone.
In addition, if any effect would force you to move 10
feet or more, you are moved only half the distance.
Strong-Blooded Dwarf
Your blood runs hearty and strong, and you can shake
off toxins. You gain poison resistance equal to half your
level (minimum 1), and each of your successful saving
throws against a poison affliction reduces its stage by 2,
or by 1 for a virulent poison. Each critical success against
an ongoing poison reduces its stage by 3, or by 2 for a
virulent poison.
Ancestry Feats
At 1st level, you gain one ancestry feat, and you gain an
additional ancestry feat every 4 levels thereafter (at 5th,
9th, 13th, and 17th levels). As a dwarf, you select from
among the following ancestry feats.
1ST LEVEL
DWARVEN LORE FEAT 1
DWARF
You eagerly absorbed the old stories and traditions of your
ancestors, your gods, and your people, studying in subjects
and techniques passed down for generation upon generation.
You gain the trained proficiency rank in Crafting and
Religion. If you would automatically become trained in one
of those skills (from your background or class, for example),
you instead become trained in a skill of your choice. You also
become trained in Dwarven Lore.
DWARVEN WEAPON FAMILIARITY FEAT 1
DWARF
Your kin have instilled in you an affinity for hard-hitting
weapons, and you prefer these to more elegant arms. You are
trained with the battle axe, pick, and warhammer.
You also gain access to all uncommon dwarf weapons. For
the purpose of determining your proficiency, martial dwarf
weapons are simple weapons and advanced dwarf weapons
are martial weapons.
ROCK RUNNER FEAT 1
DWARF
Your innate connection to stone makes you adept at moving
across uneven surfaces. You can ignore difficult terrain caused
by rubble and uneven ground made of stone and earth.
In addition, when you use the Acrobatics skill to Balance on
narrow surfaces or uneven ground made of stone or earth, you
aren’t flat-footed, and when you roll a success at one of these
Acrobatics checks, you get a critical success instead.
STONECUNNING FEAT 1
DWARF
You have a knack for noticing even small inconsistencies and
craftsmanship techniques in the stonework around you. You
gain a +2 circumstance bonus to Perception checks to notice
unusual stonework. This bonus applies to checks to discover
mechanical traps made of stone or hidden within stone.
If you aren’t using the Seek action or searching, the GM
automatically rolls a secret check for you to notice unusual
stonework anyway. This check doesn’t gain the circumstance
bonus, and it takes a –2 circumstance penalty.
UNBURDENED IRON FEAT 1
DWARF
You’ve learned techniques first devised by your ancestors
during their ancient wars, allowing you to comfortably wear
massive suits of armor. Ignore the reduction to your Speed
from any armor you wear.
In addition, any time you’re taking a penalty to your Speed
from some other reason (such as from the encumbered
condition or from a spell), deduct 5 feet from the penalty.
For example, the encumbered condition normally gives a
–10-foot penalty to Speed, but it gives you only a –5-foot
penalty. If your Speed is taking multiple penalties, pick only
one penalty to reduce.
VENGEFUL HATRED FEAT 1
DWARF
You heart aches for vengeance against those who have
wronged your people. Choose one of the following dwarven
ancestral foes when you gain Vengeful Hatred: drow, duergar,
giant, or orc. You gain a +1 circumstance bonus to damage
with weapons and unarmed attacks against creatures with
that trait. If your attack would deal more than one weapon die
of damage (as is common at higher levels than 1st), the bonus
is equal to the number of weapon dice or unarmed attack dice.
In addition, if a creature critically succeeds at an attack
against you and deals damage to you, you gain your bonus
to damage against that creature for 1 minute regardless of
whether it has the chosen trait.
Special Your GM can add appropriate creature traits to the
ancestral foes list if your character is from a community that
commonly fights other types of enemies.
5TH LEVEL
BOULDER ROLL [two-actions] FEAT 5
DWARF
Prerequisites Rock Runner
Your dwarven build allows you to push foes around, just like
Core Rulebook
36
a mighty boulder tumbles through a subterranean cavern. Take a Step into the square of
a foe that is your size or smaller, and the foe must move into the empty space directly
behind it. The foe must move even if doing so places it in harm’s way. The foe can attempt
a Fortitude saving throw against your Athletics DC to block your Step. If the foe attempts
this saving throw, unless it critically succeeds, it takes bludgeoning damage equal to your
level plus your Strength modifier.
If the foe can’t move into an empty space (if it is surrounded by solid objects or other
creatures, for example), your Boulder Roll has no effect.
DWARVEN WEAPON CUNNING FEAT 5
DWARF
Prerequisites Dwarven Weapon Familiarity
You’ve learned cunning techniques to get the best effects out of your dwarven weapons.
Whenever you critically hit using a battle axe, pick, warhammer, or a dwarf weapon, you
apply the weapon’s critical specialization effect.
9TH LEVEL
MOUNTAIN’S STOUTNESS FEAT 9
DWARF
Your hardiness lets you withstand more punishment than most before going down.
Increase your maximum Hit Points by your level. You also decrease the DC of recovery
checks when you have the dying condition by 1.
If you also have the Toughness feat, the Hit Points gained from it and this feat
are cumulative, and you decrease the DC of recovery
checks by 4.
STONEWALKER FEAT 9
DWARF
You have a deep reverence for and connection
to stone. You gain meld into stone as a 3rd-level
divine innate spell that you can cast once
per day.
If you have the Stonecunning dwarf ancestry
feat, you can attempt to find unusual stonework and
stonework traps that require legendary proficiency
in Perception. If you have both Stonecunning and
legendary proficiency in Perception, when
you’re not Seeking and the GM rolls a secret
check for you to notice unusual stonework,
you keep the bonus from Stonecunning and
don’t take the –2 circumstance penalty.
13TH LEVEL
DWARVEN WEAPON EXPERTISE FEAT 13
DWARF
Prerequisites Dwarven Weapon Familiarity
Your dwarven affinity blends with your training,
granting you great skill with dwarven weapons.
Whenever you gain a class feature that grants you
expert or greater proficiency in certain weapons, you also
gain that proficiency for battle axes, picks, warhammers,
and all dwarven weapons in which you are trained.
DWARVEN
ADVENTURERS
Dwarven adventurers tend to
work as treasure hunters or
sellswords. They often leave their
citadels and subterranean cities
in search of wealth to enrich their
homeland or to reclaim long-lost
dwarven treasures or lands taken
by the enemies of their kin.
Typical dwarven backgrounds
include acolyte, artisan, merchant,
miner, and warrior. Dwarves excel
at many of the martial classes,
such as barbarian, fighter, monk,
and ranger, but they also make
excellent clerics and druids.
Ancestries & backgrounds 2
37
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Elf
As an ancient people, elves have seen great change and have the perspective that can
come only from watching the arc of history. After leaving the world in ancient times, they
returned to a changed land, and they still struggle to reclaim their ancestral homes, most
notably from terrible demons that have invaded parts of their lands. To some, the elves
are objects of awe—graceful and beautiful, with immense talent and knowledge. Among
themselves, however, the elves place far more importance on personal freedom than on
living up to these ideals.
hair, or mannerisms that reflect the environment
in which you live.
Others Probably...
• Focus on your appearance, either admiring
your grace or treating you as if you’re
physically fragile.
• Assume you practice archery, cast
spells, fight demons, and have perfected
one or more fine arts.
Elves combine otherworldly grace, sharp intellect,
and mysterious charm in a way that is practically
magnetic to members of other ancestries. They
are often voraciously intellectual, though their
studies delve into a level of detail
that most shorter-lived peoples
find excessive or inefficient.
Valuing kindness and beauty,
elves ever strive to improve
their manners, appearance,
and culture.
Elves are often rather
private people, steeped in
the secrets of their groves and
kinship groups. They’re slow to
build friendships outside their
kinsfolk, but for a specific reason:
they subtly and deeply attune
to their environment and their
companions. There’s a physical
element to this attunement, but
it isn’t only superficial. Elves
who spend their lives among
shorter-lived peoples often develop
a skewed perception of their own
mortality and tend to become
morose after watching generation
after generation of companions
age and die. These elves are called
the Forlorn.
If you want a character who is
magical, mystical, and mysterious,
you should play an elf.
You Might...
• Carefully curate your
relationships with people
with shorter lifespans, either
keeping a careful emotional
distance or resigning yourself
to outliving them.
• Adopt specialized or obscure interests
simply for the sake of mastering them.
• Have features such as eye color, skin tone,
• Worry that you privately look down on
them, or feel like you’re condescending
and aloof.
Physical Description
While generally taller than humans, elves
possess a fragile grace, accentuated by
long features and sharply pointed ears.
Their eyes are wide and almond-shaped,
featuring large and vibrant-colored
pupils that make up the entire visible
portion of the eye. These pupils give
them an alien look and allow them to see
sharply even in very little light.
Elves gradually adapt to their
environment and their companions,
and they often take on physical traits
reflecting their surroundings. An elf who
has dwelled in primeval forests for centuries,
for example, might exhibit verdant hair and
gnarled fingers, while one who’s lived in a
desert might have golden pupils and skin.
Elven fashion, like the elves themselves, tends
Core Rulebook
38
to reflect their surroundings. Elves living in the forests and other wilderness locales
wear clothing that plays off the terrain and flora of their homes, while those who live
in cities tend to wear the latest fashions.
Elves reach physical adulthood around the age of 20, though they aren’t
considered to be fully emotionally mature by other elves until closer to the passing
of their first century, once they’ve experienced more, held several occupations, and
outlived a generation of shorter-lived people. A typical elf can live to around 600
years old.
Society
Elven culture is deep, rich, and on the decline. Their society peaked millennia ago,
long before they fled the world to escape a great calamity. They’ve since returned,
but rebuilding is no easy task. Their inborn patience and intellectual curiosity make
elves excellent sages, philosophers, and wizards, and their societies are built upon
their inherent sense of wonder and knowledge. Elven architecture displays their deep
appreciation of beauty, and elven cities are wondrous works of art.
Elves hold deeply seated ideals of individualism, allowing each elf to explore
multiple occupations before alighting on a particular pursuit or passion that suits
her best. Elves bear notorious grudges against rivals, which the elves call ilduliel, but
these antagonistic relationships can sometimes blossom into friendships over time.
Alignment and Religion
Elves are often emotional and capricious, yet they hold high ideals close to their
hearts. As such, many are chaotic good. They prefer deities who share their love of
all things mystic and artistic. Desna and Shelyn are particular favorites, the former
for her sense of wonder and the latter for her appreciation of artistry. Calistria is the
most notorious of elven deities, as she represents many of the elven ideals taken to
the extreme.
Names
An elf keeps their personal name secret among their family, while giving a nickname
when meeting other people. This nickname can change over time, due to events in
the elf’s life or even on a whim. A single elf might be known by many names by
associates of different ages and regions. Elven names consist of multiple syllables and
are meant to flow lyrically—at least in the Elven tongue. They so commonly end in
“-el” or “-ara” that other cultures sometimes avoid names ending in these syllables
to avoid sounding too elven.
Sample Names
Aerel, Amrunelara, Caladrel, Dardlara, Faunra, Heldalel, Jathal, Lanliss, Oparal,
Seldlon, Soumral, Talathel, Tessara, Variel, Yalandlara, Zordlon
Elf Heritages
Elves live long lives and adapt to their environment after dwelling there for a long
time. Choose one of the following elven heritages at 1st level.
Arctic Elf
You dwell deep in the frozen north and have gained incredible resilience against cold
environments, granting you cold resistance equal to half your level (minimum 1). You
treat environmental cold effects as if they were one step less extreme (incredible cold
becomes extreme, extreme cold becomes severe, and so on).
Cavern Elf
You were born or spent many years in underground tunnels or caverns where light
is scarce. You gain darkvision.
Hit Points
6
Size
Medium
Speed
30 feet
Ability Boosts
Dexterity
Intelligence
Free
Ability Flaw
Constitution
Languages
Common
Elven
Additional languages equal to
your Intelligence modifier (if it’s
positive). Choose from Celestial,
Draconic, Gnoll, Gnomish,
Goblin, Orcish, Sylvan, and
any other languages to which
you have access (such as
the languages prevalent in
your region).
Traits
Elf
Humanoid
Low-Light Vision
You can see in dim light as
though it were bright light,
so you ignore the concealed
condition due to dim light.
Ancestries & backgrounds 2
39
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Seer Elf
You have an inborn ability to detect and understand
magical phenomena. You can cast the detect magic cantrip
as an arcane innate spell at will. A cantrip is heightened to
a spell level equal to half your level rounded up.
In addition, you gain a +1 circumstance bonus to
checks to Identify Magic and to Decipher Writing of
a magical nature. These skill actions typically use the
Arcana, Nature, Occultism, or Religion skill.
Whisper Elf
Your ears are finely tuned, able to detect even the slightest
whispers of sound. As long as you can hear normally, you
can use the Seek action to sense undetected creatures in
a 60-foot cone instead of a 30-foot cone. You also gain
a +2 circumstance bonus to locate undetected creatures
that you could hear within 30 feet with a Seek action.
Woodland Elf
You’re adapted to life in the forest or the deep jungle,
and you know how to climb trees and use foliage to your
advantage. When Climbing trees, vines, and other foliage,
you move at half your Speed on a success and at full
Speed on a critical success (and you move at full Speed
on a success if you have Quick Climb). This doesn’t affect
you if you’re using a climb Speed.
You can always use the Take Cover action when you
are within forest terrain to gain cover, even if you’re not
next to an obstacle you can Take Cover behind.
Ancestry Feats
At 1st level, you gain one ancestry feat, and you gain an
additional ancestry feat every 4 levels thereafter (at 5th,
9th, 13th, and 17th levels). As an elf, you select from
among the following ancestry feats.
1ST LEVEL
ANCESTRAL LONGEVITY FEAT 1
ELF
Prerequisites at least 100 years old
You have accumulated a vast array of lived knowledge over
the years. During your daily preparations, you can reflect
upon your life experiences to gain the trained proficiency
rank in one skill of your choice. This proficiency lasts until
you prepare again. Since this proficiency is temporary, you
can’t use it as a prerequisite for a skill increase or a permanent
character option like a feat.
ELVEN LORE FEAT 1
ELF
You’ve studied in traditional elven arts, learning about
arcane magic and the world around you. You gain the
trained proficiency rank in Arcana and Nature. If you would
automatically become trained in one of those skills (from
your background or class, for example), you instead become
trained in a skill of your choice. You also become trained in
Elven Lore.
ELVEN WEAPON FAMILIARITY FEAT 1
ELF
You favor bows and other elegant weapons. You are trained
with longbows, composite longbows, longswords, rapiers,
shortbows, and composite shortbows.
In addition, you gain access to all uncommon elf weapons.
For the purpose of determining your proficiency, martial elf
weapons are simple weapons and advanced elf weapons are
martial weapons.
FORLORN FEAT 1
ELF
Watching your friends age and die fills you with moroseness
that protects you against harmful emotions. You gain a +1
circumstance bonus to saving throws against emotion effects.
If you roll a success on a saving throw against an emotion
effect, you get a critical success instead.
NIMBLE ELF FEAT 1
ELF
Your muscles are tightly honed. Your Speed increases by 5 feet.
OTHERWORLDLY MAGIC FEAT 1
ELF
Your elven magic manifests as a simple arcane spell, even if
you aren’t formally trained in magic. Choose one cantrip from
the arcane spell list (page 307). You can cast this cantrip as an
arcane innate spell at will. A cantrip is heightened to a spell
level equal to half your level rounded up.
UNWAVERING MIEN FEAT 1
ELF
Your mystic control and meditations allow you to resist
external influences upon your consciousness. Whenever you
are affected by a mental effect that lasts at least 2 rounds, you
can reduce the duration by 1 round.
You still require natural sleep, but you treat your saving
throws against effects that would cause you to fall asleep as
one degree of success better. This protects only against sleep
effects, not against other forms of falling unconscious.
5TH LEVEL
AGELESS PATIENCE FEAT 5
ELF
You work at a pace born from longevity that enhances your
thoroughness. You can voluntarily spend twice as much
time as normal on a Perception check or skill check to gain
a +2 circumstance bonus to that check. You also don’t treat
a natural 1 as worse than usual on these checks; you get a
Core Rulebook
40
critical failure only if your result is 10 lower than the DC. For example, you could get these
benefits if you spent 2 actions to Seek, which normally takes 1 action. You can get these
benefits during exploration by taking twice as long exploring as normal, or in downtime by
spending twice as much downtime.
The GM might determine a situation doesn’t grant you a benefit if a delay would
be directly counterproductive to your success, such as a tense negotiation with an
impatient creature.
ELVEN WEAPON ELEGANCE FEAT 5
ELF
Prerequisites Elven Weapon Familiarity
You are attuned to the weapons of your elven ancestors and are particularly deadly when
using them. Whenever you critically hit using an elf weapon or one of the weapons listed in
Elven Weapon Familiarity, you apply the weapon’s critical specialization effect.
9TH LEVEL
ELF STEP [one-action] FEAT 9
ELF
You move in a graceful dance, and even your steps are broad. You Step 5 feet twice.
EXPERT LONGEVITY FEAT 9
ELF
Prerequisites Ancestral Longevity
You’ve continued to refine the knowledge and skills you’ve gained through
your life. When you choose a skill in which to become trained with
Ancestral Longevity, you can also choose a skill in which you are already
trained and become an expert in that skill. This lasts until your Ancestral
Longevity expires.
When the effects of Ancestral Longevity and Expert Longevity expire, you can
retrain one of your skill increases. The skill increase you gain from this retraining must
either make you trained in the skill you chose with Ancestral Longevity or make you an
expert in the skill you chose with Expert Longevity.
13TH LEVEL
UNIVERSAL LONGEVITY [one-action] FEAT 13
ELF
Prerequisites Expert Longevity
Frequency once per day
You’ve perfected your ability to keep up with all the skills you’ve learned over your long
life, so you’re almost never truly untrained at a skill. You reflect on your life experiences,
changing the skills you selected with Elven Longevity and Expert Longevity.
ELVEN WEAPON EXPERTISE FEAT 13
ELF
Prerequisites Elven Weapon Familiarity
Your elven affinity blends with your class training, granting you
great skill with elven weapons. Whenever you gain a class
feature that grants you expert or greater proficiency
in certain weapons, you also gain that proficiency in
longbows, composite longbows, longswords, rapiers,
shortbows, composite shortbows, and all elf weapons
in which you are trained.
ELVEN ADVENTURERS
Many elves adventure to find
beauty and discover new
things. Typical backgrounds
for an elf include emissary,
hunter, noble, scholar, or scout.
Elves often become rangers or
rogues, taking advantage of
their dexterity, or alchemists
or wizards, exploring their
intellectual curiosity.
Ancestries & backgrounds 2
41
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Gnome
Long ago, early gnome ancestors emigrated from the First World, realm of the fey. While
it’s unclear why the first gnomes wandered to Golarion, this lineage manifests in modern
gnomes as bizarre reasoning, eccentricity, obsessive tendencies, and what some see as
naivete. These qualities are further reflected in their physical characteristics, such as
spindly limbs, brightly colored hair, and childlike and extremely expressive facial features
that further reflect their otherworldly origins.
Always hungry for new experiences, gnomes constantly
wander both mentally and physically, attempting to stave
off a terrible ailment that threatens all of their people.
This affliction—the Bleaching—strikes gnomes who
fail to dream, innovate, and take in new experiences,
in the gnomes’ absence of crucial magical essence
from the First World. Gnomes latch onto a source of
localized magic where they live, typically primal magic,
as befits their fey lineage, but this isn’t enough to avoid
the Bleaching unless they supplement this magic with
new experiences. The Bleaching slowly drains the
color—literally—from gnomes, and it plunges those
affected into states of deep depression that eventually
claim their lives. Very few gnomes survive
this scourge, becoming deeply morose
and wise survivors known
as bleachlings.
If you want a character with boundless enthusiasm
and an alien, fey outlook on morality and life, you should
play a gnome.
You Might...
• Embrace learning and hop from one area of study
to another without warning.
• Rush into action before fully taking stock of the
entire situation.
• Speak, think, and move quickly, and lose patience
with those who can’t keep up.
Others Probably...
• Appreciate your enthusiasm and the energy with
which you approach new situations.
• Struggle to understand your motivations or adapt
to your rapid changes of direction.
• See you as unpredictable, flighty, unreliable, or
even reckless.
Physical Description
Most gnomes stand just over 3 feet in height and weigh
little more than a human child. They exhibit a wide
range of natural skin, hair, and eye colors. For gnomes
that haven’t begun the Bleaching, nearly any hair and
eye color other than white is possible, with vibrant
colors most frequent, while skin tones span a slightly
narrower spectrum and tend toward earthy tones and
pinkish hues, though occasionally green, black, or pale
blue. Gnomes’ large eyes and dense facial muscles allow
them to be particularly expressive in their emotions.
Gnomes typically reach physical maturity at the age
of 18, though many gnomes maintain a childlike
curiosity about the world even into adulthood.
A gnome can theoretically live to any age if
she can stave off the Bleaching indefinitely,
but in practice gnomes rarely live longer than
around 400 years.
Society
While most gnomes adopt some of the cultural
practices of the region in which they live, they tend
to pick and choose, adjusting their communities to
fit their own fey logic. This often leads to majority
gnome communities eventually consisting almost entirely
Core Rulebook
42
of gnomes, as other people, bewildered by gnomish political decisions, choose to
move elsewhere. Gnomes have little culture that they would consider entirely their
own. No gnome kingdoms or nations exist on the surface of Golarion, and gnomes
wouldn’t know what to do with such a state if they had one.
By necessity, few gnomes marry for life, instead allowing relationships to run their
course before amicably moving on, the better to stave off the Bleaching with new
experiences. Though gnome families tend to be small, many gnome communities
raise children communally, with fluid family boundaries. As adults depart the
settlement, unrelated adolescents sometimes tag along, creating adopted families to
journey together.
Alignment and Religion
Though gnomes are impulsive tricksters with inscrutable motives and confusing
methods, many at least attempt to make the world a better place. They are prone to
fits of powerful emotion, and they are often good but rarely lawful. Gnomes most
commonly worship deities that value individuality and nature, such as Cayden
Cailean, Desna, Gozreh, and Shelyn.
Names
Gnome names can get quite complex and polysyllabic. They have little interest in
familial names, and most children receive their names purely on a parent’s whim.
Gnomes rarely concern themselves with how easy their names are to pronounce,
and they often go by shorter nicknames. Some even collect and chronicle
these nicknames. Among gnomes, the shorter the name, the more feminine it’s
considered to be.
Sample Names
Abroshtor, Bastargre, Besh, Fijit, Halungalom, Krolmnite, Neji, Majet, Pai,
Poshment, Queck, Trig, Zarzuket, Zatqualmie
Gnome Heritages
A diverse collection of oddballs, gnomes have all sorts of peculiar strains among
their bloodlines. Choose one of the following gnome heritages at 1st level.
Chameleon Gnome
The color of your hair and skin is mutable, possibly due to latent magic. You can
slowly change the vibrancy and the exact color, and the coloration can be different
across your body, allowing you to create patterns or other colorful designs. It takes
a single action for minor localized shifts and up to an hour for dramatic shifts
throughout your body. While you’re asleep, the colors shift on their own in tune
with your dreams, giving you an unusual coloration each morning. When you’re in
an area where your coloration is roughly similar to the environment (for instance,
forest green in a forest), you can use the single action to make minor localized
shifts designed to help you blend into your surroundings. This grants you a +2
circumstance bonus to Stealth checks until your surroundings shift in coloration
or pattern.
Fey-touched Gnome
The blood of the fey is so strong within you that you’re truly one of them. You gain
the fey trait, in addition to the gnome and humanoid traits. Choose one cantrip
from the primal spell list (page 314). You can cast this spell as a primal innate spell
at will. A cantrip is heightened to a spell level equal to half your level rounded up.
You can change this cantrip to a different one from the same list once per day by
meditating to realign yourself with the First World; this is a 10-minute activity that
has the concentrate trait.
Ancestries & backgrounds 2
43
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Hit Points
8
Size
Small
Speed
25 feet
Ability Boosts
Constitution
Charisma
Free
Ability Flaw
Strength
Languages
Common
Gnomish
Sylvan
Additional languages equal to
your Intelligence modifier (if it’s
positive). Choose from Draconic,
Dwarven, Elven, Goblin, Jotun,
Orcish, and any other languages
to which you have access (such
as the languages prevalent in
your region).
Traits
Gnome
Humanoid
Low-Light Vision
You can see in dim light as
though it were bright light,
and you ignore the concealed
condition due to dim light.
Sensate Gnome
You see all colors as brighter, hear all sounds as richer,
and especially smell all scents with incredible detail.
You gain a special sense: imprecise scent with a range of
30 feet. This means you can use your sense of smell to
determine the exact location of a creature (as explained
on page 465). The GM will usually double the range if
you’re downwind from the creature or halve the range
if you’re upwind.
In addition, you gain a +2 circumstance bonus to
Perception checks whenever you’re trying to locate an
undetected creature that is within the range of your scent.
Umbral Gnome
Whether from a connection to dark or shadowy fey,
from the underground deep gnomes also known as
svirfneblin, or another source, you can see in complete
darkness. You gain darkvision.
Wellspring Gnome
Some other source of magic has a greater hold on
you than the primal magic of your fey lineage does.
This connection might come from an occult plane
or an ancient occult song; a deity, celestial, or fiend;
magical effluent left behind by a mage war; or ancient
rune magic.
Choose arcane, divine, or occult. You gain one
cantrip from that magical tradition’s spell list (pages
307–315). You can cast this spell as an innate spell
at will, as a spell of your chosen tradition. A cantrip
is heightened to a spell level equal to half your level
rounded up. Whenever you gain a primal innate spell
from a gnome ancestry feat, change its tradition from
primal to your chosen tradition.
Ancestry Feats
At 1st level, you gain one ancestry feat, and you gain an
additional ancestry feat every 4 levels thereafter (at 5th,
9th, 13th, and 17th level). As a gnome, you select from
among the following ancestry feats.
1ST LEVEL
ANIMAL ACCOMPLICE FEAT 1
GNOME
You build a rapport with an animal, which becomes magically
bonded to you. You gain a familiar using the rules on page
217. The type of animal is up to you, but most gnomes choose
animals with a burrow Speed.
BURROW ELOCUTIONIST FEAT 1
GNOME
You recognize the chittering of ground creatures as its own
peculiar language. You can ask questions of, receive answers
from, and use the Diplomacy skill with animals that have a
burrow Speed, such as badgers, ground squirrels, moles, and
prairie dogs. The GM determines which animals count for
this ability.
FEY FELLOWSHIP FEAT 1
GNOME
Your enhanced fey connection affords you a warmer reception
from creatures of the First World as well as tools to foil their
tricks. You gain a +2 circumstance bonus to both Perception
checks and saving throws against fey.
In addition, whenever you meet a fey creature in a social
situation, you can immediately attempt a Diplomacy check to
Make an Impression on that creature rather than needing to
converse for 1 minute. You take a –5 penalty to the check.
If you fail, you can engage in 1 minute of conversation and
attempt a new check at the end of that time rather than
accepting the failure or critical failure result.
Special If you have the Glad-Hand skill feat, you don’t take
the penalty on your immediate Diplomacy check if the target
is a fey.
FIRST WORLD MAGIC FEAT 1
GNOME
Your connection to the First World grants you a primal innate
spell, much like those of the fey. Choose one cantrip from the
primal spell list (page 314). You can cast this spell as a primal
innate spell at will. A cantrip is heightened to a spell level
equal to half your level rounded up.
GNOME OBSESSION FEAT 1
GNOME
You might have a flighty nature, but when a topic captures
your attention, you dive into it headfirst. Pick a Lore skill. You
gain the trained proficiency rank in that skill. At 2nd  level,
you gain expert proficiency in the chosen Lore as well as the
Lore granted by your background, if any. At 7th level you gain
master proficiency in these Lore skills, and at 15th level you
gain legendary proficiency in them.
GNOME WEAPON FAMILIARITY FEAT 1
GNOME
You favor unusual weapons tied to your people, such as blades
with curved and peculiar shapes. You are trained with the
glaive and kukri.
In addition, you gain access to all uncommon gnome
weapons. For the purpose of determining your proficiency,
martial gnome weapons are simple weapons and advanced
gnome weapons are martial weapons.
ILLUSION SENSE FEAT 1
GNOME
Your ancestors spent their days cloaked and cradled in
illusions, and as a result, sensing illusion magic is second
nature to you. You gain a +1 circumstance bonus to both
Perception checks and Will saves against illusions.
Core Rulebook
44
When you come within 10 feet of an illusion that can be disbelieved, the GM rolls a secret
check for you to disbelieve it, even if you didn’t spend an action to Interact with the illusion.
5TH LEVEL
ANIMAL ELOCUTIONIST FEAT 5
GNOME
Prerequisites Burrow Elocutionist
You hear animal sounds as conversations instead of unintelligent noise, and can respond in turn.
You can speak to all animals, not just animals with a burrow Speed. You gain a +1 circumstance
bonus to Make an Impression on animals (which usually uses the Diplomacy skill).
ENERGIZED FONT [one-action] FEAT 5
GNOME
Prerequisites focus pool, at least one innate spell from a gnome heritage or ancestry feat that
shares a tradition with at least one of your focus spells
Frequency once per day
The magic within you provides increased energy you can use to focus. You regain 1 Focus
Point, up to your usual maximum.
GNOME WEAPON INNOVATOR FEAT 5
GNOME
Prerequisites Gnome Weapon Familiarity
You produce outstanding results when wielding unusual weapons. Whenever you
critically hit using a glaive, kukri, or gnome weapon, you apply the weapon’s
critical specialization effect.
9TH LEVEL
FIRST WORLD ADEPT FEAT 9
GNOME
Prerequisites at least one primal innate spell
Over time your fey magic has grown stronger. You gain faerie fire and invisibility as
2nd-level primal innate spells. You can cast each of these
primal innate spells once per day.
VIVACIOUS CONDUIT FEAT 9
GNOME
Your connection to the First World has grown, and
its positive energy flows into you rapidly. If you rest
for 10 minutes, you gain Hit Points equal to your Constitution
modifier × half your level. This is cumulative with any healing you
receive from Treat Wounds.
13TH LEVEL
GNOME WEAPON EXPERTISE FEAT 13
GNOME
Prerequisites Gnome Weapon Familiarity
Your gnome affinity blends with your class training, granting you great skill with gnome
weapons. Whenever you gain a class feature that grants you expert or greater proficiency
in a given weapon or weapons, you also gain that proficiency in the glaive, kukri, and all
gnome weapons in which you are trained.
GNOME ADVENTURERS
Adventure is not so much a
choice as a necessity for most
gnomes. Adventuring gnomes
often claim mementos, allowing
them to remember and relive
their most exciting stories.
Gnomes often consider the
entertainer, merchant, or nomad
backgrounds. In addition, the
animal whisperer, barkeep,
gambler, and tinker backgrounds
are particularly appropriate.
Gnomes’ connection to magic
makes spellcasting classes
particularly thematic for you,
especially classes that match the
tradition of your primal innate
spells, such as druid or primal
sorcerer, though wellspring
gnomes might choose others.
Ancestries & backgrounds 2
45
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Goblins have a reputation as simple creatures who love
songs, fire, and eating disgusting things and who hate
reading, dogs, and horses—and there are a great many
for whom this description fits perfectly. However, great
changes have come to goblinkind, and more and more
goblins resist conformity to these stereotypes. Even among
goblins that are more worldly, many still exemplify their
old ways in some small manner, just to a more sensible
degree. Some goblins remain deeply fascinated with fire or
fearlessly devour a meal that might turn others’ stomachs.
Others are endless tinkerers and view their companions’
trash as the components of gadgets yet to be made.
Though goblins’ culture has splintered radically, their
reputation has changed little. As such, goblins who travel
to larger cities are frequently subjected to derision, and
many work twice as hard at proving their worth.
If you want a character who is eccentric, enthusiastic,
and fun-loving, you should play a goblin.
You Might...
• Strive to prove that you have a place among other
civilized peoples, perhaps even to yourself.
• Fight tooth and nail—sometimes literally—to
protect yourself and your friends from danger.
• Lighten the heavy emotional burdens others carry
(and amuse yourself) with antics and pranks.
Others Probably...
• Work to ensure you don’t accidentally (or
intentionally) set too many things on fire.
• Assume you can’t—or won’t—read.
• Wonder how you survive given your ancestry’s
typical gastronomic choices, reckless behavior,
and love of fire.
Physical Description
Goblins are stumpy humanoids with large bodies,
scrawny limbs, and massively oversized heads with large
ears and beady red eyes. Their skin ranges from green to
gray to blue, and they often bear scars, boils, and rashes.
Goblins average 3 feet tall. Most are bald, with little
or no body hair. Their jagged teeth fall out and regrow
constantly, and their fast metabolism means they eat
constantly and nap frequently. Mutations are also more
common among goblins than other peoples, and goblins
usually view particularly salient mutations as a sign of
power or fortune.
Goblins reach adolescence by the age of 3 and adulthood
4 or 5 years later. Goblins can live 50 years or more,
but without anyone to protect them from each other or
themselves, few live past 20 years of age.
Society
Goblins tend to flock to strong leaders, forming small
tribes. These tribes rarely number more than a hundred,
Goblin
The convoluted histories other people cling to don’t interest goblins. These small folk live
in the moment, and they prefer tall tales over factual records. The wars of a few decades
ago might as well be from the ancient past. Misunderstood by other people, goblins are
happy how they are. Goblin virtues are about being present, creative, and honest. They
strive to lead fulfilled lives, rather than worrying about how their journeys will end. To
tell stories, not nitpick the facts. To be small, but dream big.
Core Rulebook
46
though the larger a tribe is, the more diligent the leader must be to keep order—a
notoriously difficult task. As new threats rise across the Inner Sea region, many tribal
elders have put aside their reckless ways in the hope of forging alliances that offer
their people a greater chance at survival. Play and creativity matter more to goblins
than productivity or study, and their encampments erupt with songs and laughter.
Goblins bond closely with their allies, fiercely protecting those companions who
have protected them or offered a sympathetic ear. Goblins tend to assume for their
own protection that members of taller ancestries, which goblins often refer to
colloquially as “longshanks,” won’t treat them kindly. Learning to trust longshanks
is difficult for a goblin, and it’s been only in recent years that such a partnership
has even been an option. However, their attitude as a people is changing rapidly,
and their short lifespans and poor memories help them adapt quickly.
Alignment and Religion
Even well-intentioned goblins have trouble following the rules, meaning they’re
rarely lawful. Most goblin adventurers are chaotic neutral or chaotic good.
Organized worship confounds goblins, and most of them would rather pick their
own deities, choosing powerful monsters, natural wonders, or anything else they
find fascinating. Longshanks might have books upon books about the structures of
divinity, but to a goblin, anything can be a god if you want it to. Goblins who spend
time around people of other ancestries might adopt some of their beliefs, though,
and many goblin adventurers adopt the worship of Cayden Cailean.
Names
Goblins keep their names simple. A good name should be easy to pronounce, short
enough to shout without getting winded, and taste good to say. The namer often
picks a word that rhymes with something they like so that writing songs is easier.
Since there aren’t any real traditions regarding naming in goblin culture, children
often name themselves once they’re old enough to do something resembling talking.
Sample Names
Ak, Bokker, Frum, Guzmuk, Krobby, Loohi, Mazmord, Neeka, Omgot, Ranzak,
Rickle, Tup, Wakla, Yonk, Zibini
Goblin Heritages
Goblins, especially those of different tribes, have all sorts of physiological differences,
which they often discover only through hazardous “experiments.” Choose one of the
following goblin heritages at 1st level.
Charhide Goblin
Your ancestors have always had a connection to fire and a thicker skin, which allows
you to resist burning. You gain fire resistance equal to half your level (minimum 1).
You can also recover from being on fire more easily. Your flat check to remove
persistent fire damage is DC  10 instead of DC  15, which is reduced to DC 5 if
another creature uses a particularly appropriate action to help.
Irongut Goblin
You can subsist on food that most folks would consider spoiled. You can keep yourself
fed with poor meals in a settlement as long as garbage is readily available, without using
the Subsist downtime activity. You can eat and drink things when you are sickened.
You gain a +2 circumstance bonus to saving throws against afflictions, against
gaining the sickened condition, and to remove the sickened condition. When you
roll a success on a Fortitude save affected by this bonus, you get a critical success
instead. All these benefits apply only when the affliction or condition resulted from
something you ingested.
Hit Points
6
Size
Small
Speed
25 feet
Ability Boosts
Dexterity
Charisma
Free
Ability Flaw
Wisdom
Languages
Common
Goblin
Additional languages equal to
your Intelligence modifier (if it’s
positive). Choose from Draconic,
Dwarven, Gnoll, Gnomish,
Halfling, Orcish, and any other
languages to which you have
access (such as the languages
prevalent in your region).
Traits
Goblin
Humanoid
Darkvision
You can see in darkness and
dim light just as well as you
can see in bright light, though
your vision in darkness is in
black and white.
Ancestries & backgrounds 2
47
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Razortooth Goblin
Your family’s teeth are formidable weapons. You gain
a jaws unarmed attack that deals 1d6 piercing damage.
Your jaws are in the brawling group and have the finesse
and unarmed traits.
Snow Goblin
You are acclimated to living in frigid lands and have
skin ranging from sky blue to navy in color, as well as
blue fur. You gain cold resistance equal to half your level
(minimum 1). You treat environmental cold effects as if
they were one step less extreme (incredible cold becomes
extreme, extreme cold becomes severe, and so on).
Unbreakable Goblin
You’re able to bounce back from injuries easily due to an
exceptionally thick skull, cartilaginous bones, or some
other mixed blessing. You gain 10 Hit Points from your
ancestry instead of 6. When you fall, reduce the falling
damage you take as though you had fallen half the distance.
Ancestry Feats
At 1st level, you gain one ancestry feat, and you gain an
additional ancestry feat every 4 levels thereafter (at 5th,
9th, 13th, and 17th level). As a goblin, you can select
from the following ancestry feats.
1ST LEVEL
BURN IT! FEAT 1
GOBLIN
Fire fascinates you. Your spells and alchemical items that deal
fire damage gain a status bonus to damage equal to half the
spell’s level or one-quarter the item’s level (minimum 1). You also
gain a +1 status bonus to any persistent fire damage you deal.
CITY SCAVENGER FEAT 1
GOBLIN
You know that the greatest treasures often look like refuse, and
you scoff at those who throw away perfectly good scraps. You
gain a +1 circumstance bonus to checks to Subsist, and you can
use Society or Survival when you Subsist in a settlement.
When you Subsist in a city, you also gather valuable junk
that silly longshanks threw away. You can Earn Income using
Society or Survival in the same time as you Subsist, without
spending any additional days of downtime. You also gain a +1
circumstance bonus to this check.
Special If you have the irongut goblin heritage, increase the
bonuses to +2.
GOBLIN LORE FEAT 1
GOBLIN
You’ve picked up skills and tales from your goblin community.
You gain the trained proficiency rank in Nature and Stealth.
If  you would automatically become trained in one of those
skills (from your background or class, for example), you instead
become trained in a skill of your choice. You also become trained
in Goblin Lore.
GOBLIN SCUTTLE [reaction] FEAT 1
GOBLIN
Trigger An ally ends a move action adjacent to you.
You take advantage of your ally’s movement to adjust your
position. You Step.
GOBLIN SONG[one-action] FEAT 1
GOBLIN
You sing annoying goblin songs, distracting your foes with
silly and repetitive lyrics. Attempt a Performance check
against the Will DC of a single enemy within 30 feet. This has
all the usual traits and restrictions of a Performance check.
You can affect up to two targets within range if you have
expert proficiency in Performance, four if you have master
proficiency, and eight if you have legendary proficiency.
Critical Success The target takes a –1 status penalty to
Perception checks and Will saves for 1 minute.
Success The target takes a –1 status penalty to Perception
checks and Will saves for 1 round.
Critical Failure The target is temporarily immune to attempts
to use Goblin Song for 1 hour.
GOBLIN WEAPON FAMILIARITY FEAT 1
GOBLIN
Others might look upon them with disdain, but you know that
the weapons of your people are as effective as they are sharp.
You are trained with the dogslicer and horsechopper.
In addition, you gain access to all uncommon goblin weapons.
For the purpose of determining your proficiency, martial goblin
weapons are simple weapons and advanced goblin weapons are
martial weapons.
JUNK TINKER FEAT 1
GOBLIN
You can make useful tools out of even twisted or rusted scraps.
When using the Crafting skill to Craft, you can make level 0
items, including weapons but not armor, out of junk. This reduces
the Price to one-quarter the usual amount but always results in a
shoddy item. Shoddy items normally give a penalty, but you don’t
take this penalty when using shoddy items you made.
You can also incorporate junk to save money while you Craft
any item. This grants you a discount on the item as if you had
spent 1 additional day working to reduce the cost, but the item
is obviously made of junk. At the GM’s discretion, this might
affect the item’s resale value depending on the buyer’s tastes.
ROUGH RIDER FEAT 1
GOBLIN
You are especially good at riding traditional goblin mounts. You
gain the Ride feat, even if you don’t meet the prerequisites.
You gain a +1 circumstance bonus to Nature checks to use
Core Rulebook
48
Command an Animal on a goblin dog or wolf mount. You can always select a wolf as your
animal companion, even if you would usually select an animal companion with the mount
special ability, such as for a champion’s steed ally.
VERY SNEAKY FEAT 1
GOBLIN
Taller folk rarely pay attention to the shadows at their feet, and you take full advantage of
this. You can move 5 feet farther when you take the Sneak action, up to your Speed.
In addition, as long as you continue to use Sneak actions and succeed at your Stealth check,
you don’t become observed if you don’t have cover or greater cover and aren’t concealed at
the end of the Sneak action, as long as you have cover or greater cover or are concealed at
the end of your turn.
5TH LEVEL
GOBLIN WEAPON FRENZY FEAT 5
GOBLIN
Prerequisites Goblin Weapon Familiarity
You know how to wield your people’s vicious weapons. Whenever you score a critical hit
using a goblin weapon, you apply the weapon’s critical
specialization effect.
9TH LEVEL
CAVE CLIMBER FEAT 9
GOBLIN
After years of crawling and climbing through caverns,
you can climb easily anywhere you go. You gain a climb
Speed of 10 feet.
SKITTERING SCUTTLE FEAT 9
GOBLIN
Prerequisites Goblin Scuttle
You can scuttle farther and faster when maneuvering alongside
allies. When you use Goblin Scuttle, you can Stride up to half your Speed
instead of Stepping.
13TH LEVEL
GOBLIN WEAPON EXPERTISE FEAT 13
GOBLIN
Prerequisites Goblin Weapon Familiarity
Your goblin affinity blends with your class training, granting you great
skill with goblin weapons. Whenever you gain a class feature that grants
you expert or greater proficiency in a given weapon or weapons, you
also gain that proficiency in the dogslicer, horsechopper, and all goblin
weapons in which you are trained.
VERY, VERY SNEAKY FEAT 13
GOBLIN
Prerequisites Very Sneaky
You can move up to your Speed when you use the Sneak action, and you no
longer need to have cover or greater cover or be concealed to Hide or Sneak.
GOBLIN ADVENTURERS
To some degree, almost every
goblin is an adventurer, surviving
life on the edge using skill and
wits. Goblins explore and hunt
for treasures by nature, though
some become true adventurers
in their own rights, often after
being separated from their group
or tribe.
Goblins often have the
acrobat, criminal, entertainer,
gladiator, hunter, and street
urchin backgrounds. Consider
playing an alchemist, since many
goblins love fire, or a bard, since
many goblins love songs. As
scrappy survivors, goblins are
often rogues who dart about the
shadows, though their inherently
charismatic nature also draws
them to the pursuit of magical
classes such as sorcerer.
Ancestries & backgrounds 2
49
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Many taller people dismiss halflings due to their size
or, worse, treat them like children. Halflings use these
prejudices and misconceptions to their advantage, gaining
access to opportunities and performing deeds of daring
mischief or heroism. A halfling’s curiosity is tempered
by wisdom and caution, leading to calculated risks and
narrow escapes.
While their wanderlust and curiosity sometimes drive
them toward adventure, halflings also carry strong ties
to house and home, often spending above their means to
achieve comfort in their homelife.
If you want to play a character who must contend with
these opposing drives toward adventure and comfort,
you should play a halfling.
You Might...
• Get along well with a wide variety of people and
enjoy meeting new friends.
• Find it difficult to resist indulging your curiosity,
even when you know it’s going to lead to trouble.
• Hold a deep and personal hatred of the practice of
slavery and devote yourself to freeing those who
still labor against their will.
Others Probably...
• Appreciate your ability to always find a silver
lining or something to laugh about, no matter
how dire the situation.
• Think you bring good luck with you.
• Underestimate your strength, endurance, and
fighting prowess.
Physical Description
Halflings are short humanoids who look vaguely like
smaller humans. They rarely grow to be more than 3
feet in height. Halfling proportions vary, with some
looking like shorter adult humans with slightly larger
heads and others having proportions closer to those of
a human child.
Most halflings prefer to walk barefoot rather than
wearing shoes, and those who do so develop roughly
calloused soles on their feet over time. Tufts of thick,
often-curly hair warm the tops of their broad, tanned
feet. Halfling skin tones tend toward rich, tawny shades
like amber or oak, and their hair color ranges from a light
golden blond to raven black.
Halfling
Claiming no place as their own, halflings control few settlements larger than villages.
Instead, they frequently live among humans within the walls of larger cities, carving out
small communities alongside taller folk. Many halflings lead perfectly fulfilling lives in the
shadows of their larger neighbors, while others prefer a nomadic existence, traveling the
world and taking advantage of opportunities and adventures as they come.
Optimistic and cheerful, blessed with uncanny luck, and
driven by powerful wanderlust, halflings make up for
their short stature with an abundance of bravado and
curiosity. At once excitable and easygoing, they are the
best kind of opportunists, and their passions favor joy
over violence. Even in the jaws of danger, halflings rarely
lose their sense of humor.
Core Rulebook
50
Halflings reach physical adulthood around the age of 20. A typical halfling can live
to be around 150 years old.
Society
Despite their jovial and friendly nature, halflings don’t usually tend to congregate.
They have no cultural homeland in the Inner Sea region, and they instead weave
themselves throughout the societies of the world. Halflings eke out whatever
living they can manage, many performing menial labor or holding simple service
jobs. Some halflings reject city life, instead turning to the open road and traveling
from place to place in search of fortune and fame. These nomadic halflings often
travel in small groups, sharing hardships and simple pleasures among close friends
and family.
Wherever halflings go, they seamlessly blend into the society they find themselves
in, adapting to the culture of the predominant ancestry around them and adding
their uniquely halfling twists, creating a blend of cultural diffusion that enriches
both cultures.
Alignment and Religion
Halflings are loyal to their friends and their family, but they aren’t afraid to do what
needs to be done in order to survive. Halfling alignments vary, typically closely in
keeping with the alignment of the other ancestries that live around them. Halflings
favor gods that either grant luck, like Desna, or encourage guile, like Norgorber,
and many appreciate Cayden Cailean’s role as a liberator, as well as any religions
common among other ancestries around them.
Names
Halfling names are usually two to three syllables, with a gentle sound that avoids
hard consonants. Preferring their names to sound humble, halflings see overly long
or complex names as a sign of arrogance. This goes only for their own people,
however—halflings have names that suit them, and they understand that elves and
humans might have longer names to suit their own aesthetics. Humans in particular
have a tendency to refer to halflings by nicknames, with “Lucky” being common to
the point of absurdity.
Sample Names
Anafa, Antal, Bellis, Boram, Etune, Filiu, Jamir, Kaleb, Linna, Marra, Miro, Rillka,
Sistra, Sumak, Yamyra
Halfling Heritages
Living across the land, halflings of different heritages might appear in regions far
from are their ancestors lived. Choose one of the following halfling heritages at
1st level.
Gutsy Halfling
Your family line is known for keeping a level head and staving off fear when the
chips were down, making them wise leaders and sometimes even heroes. When
you roll a success on a saving throw against an emotion effect, you get a critical
success instead.
Hillock Halfling
Accustomed to a calm life in the hills, your people find rest and relaxation especially
replenishing, particularly when indulging in creature comforts. When you regain Hit
Points overnight, add your level to the Hit Points regained. When anyone uses the
Medicine skill to Treat your Wounds, you can eat a snack to add your level to the Hit
Points you regain from their treatment.
Hit Points
6
Size
Small
Speed
25 feet
Ability Boosts
Dexterity
Wisdom
Free
Ability Flaw
Strength
Languages
Common
Halfling
Additional languages equal
to your Intelligence modifier
(if it’s positive). Choose from
Dwarven, Elven, Gnomish,
Goblin, and any other languages
to which you have access (such
as the languages prevalent in
your region).
Traits
Halfling
Humanoid
Keen Eyes
Your eyes are sharp, allowing
you to make out small details
about concealed or even
invisible creatures that others
might miss. You gain a +2
circumstance bonus when using
the Seek action to find hidden or
undetected creatures within 30
feet of you. When you target an
opponent that is concealed from
you or hidden from you, reduce
the DC of the flat check to 3 for
a concealed target or 9 for a
hidden one.
Ancestries & backgrounds 2
51
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Nomadic Halfling
Your ancestors have traveled from place to place for
generations, never content to settle down. You gain two
additional languages of your choice, chosen from among
the common and uncommon languages available to you,
and every time you take the Multilingual feat, you gain
another new language.
Twilight Halfling
Your ancestors performed many secret acts under the
concealing cover of dusk, whether for good or ill, and
over time they developed the ability to see in twilight
beyond even the usual keen sight of halflings. You gain
low-light vision.
Wildwood Halfling
You hail from deep in a jungle or forest, and you’ve
learned how to use your small size to wriggle through
undergrowth, vines, and other obstacles. You ignore
difficult terrain from trees, foliage, and undergrowth.
Ancestry Feats
At 1st level, you gain one ancestry feat, and you gain an
additional ancestry feat every 4 levels thereafter (at 5th,
9th, 13th, and 17th levels). As a halfling, you select from
among the following ancestry feats.
1ST LEVEL
DISTRACTING SHADOWS FEAT 1
HALFLING
You have learned to remain hidden by using larger folk as
a distraction to avoid drawing attention to yourself. You
can use creatures that are at least one size larger than you
(usually Medium or larger) as cover for the Hide and Sneak
actions, though you still can’t use such creatures as cover for
other uses, such as the Take Cover action.
HALFLING LORE FEAT 1
HALFLING
You’ve dutifully learned how to keep your balance and how
to stick to the shadows where it’s safe, important skills
passed down through generations of halfling tradition. You
gain the trained proficiency rank in Acrobatics and Stealth.
If you would automatically become trained in one of those
skills (from your background or class, for example), you
instead become trained in a skill of your choice. You also
become trained in Halfling Lore.
HALFLING LUCK [free-action] FEAT 1
FORTUNE HALFLING
Frequency once per day
Trigger You fail a skill check or saving throw.
Your happy-go-lucky nature makes it seem like misfortune
avoids you, and to an extent, that might even be true. You
can reroll the triggering check, but you must use the new
result, even if it’s worse than your first roll.
HALFLING WEAPON FAMILIARITY FEAT 1
HALFLING
You favor traditional halfling weapons, so you’ve learned how
to use them more effectively. You have the trained proficiency
with the sling, halfling sling staff, and shortsword.
In addition, you gain access to all uncommon halfling
weapons. For you, martial halfling weapons are simple
weapons, and advanced halfling weapons are martial weapons.
SURE FEET FEAT 1
HALFLING
Whether keeping your balance or scrambling up a tricky
climb, your hairy, calloused feet easily find purchase. If
you roll a success on an Acrobatics check to Balance or an
Athletics check to Climb, you get a critical success instead.
You’re not flat-footed when you attempt to Balance or Climb.
TITAN SLINGER FEAT 1
HALFLING
You have learned how to use your sling to fell enormous
creatures. When you hit on an attack with a sling against
a Large or larger creature, increase the size of the weapon
damage die by one step (details on increasing weapon
damage die sizes can be found on page 279).
UNFETTERED HALFLING FEAT 1
HALFLING
You were forced into service as a laborer, either pressed into
indentured servitude or shackled by the evils of slavery, but
you’ve since escaped and have trained to ensure you’ll never
be caught again. Whenever you roll a success on a check to
Escape or a saving throw against an effect that would impose
the grabbed or restrained condition on you, you get a critical
success instead. Whenever a creature rolls a failure on a check
to Grapple you, they get a critical failure instead. If a creature
uses the Grab ability on you, it must succeed at an Athletics
check to grab you instead of automatically grabbing you.
WATCHFUL HALFLING FEAT 1
HALFLING
Your communal lifestyle causes you to pay close attention
to the people around you, allowing you to more easily notice
when they act out of character. You gain a +2 circumstance
bonus to Perception checks when using the Sense Motive
basic action to notice enchanted or possessed characters. If
you aren’t actively using Sense Motive on an enchanted or
possessed character, the GM rolls a secret check, without the
usual circumstance and with a –2 circumstance penalty, for you
to potentially notice the enchantment or possession anyway.
In addition to using it for skill checks, you can use the Aid
basic action to grant a bonus to another creature’s saving
throw or other check to overcome enchantment or possession.
Core Rulebook
52
As usual for Aid, you need to prepare by using an action on your turn to encourage the
creature to fight against the effect.
5TH LEVEL
CULTURAL ADAPTABILITY FEAT 5
HALFLING
During your adventures, you’ve honed your ability to adapt to the culture of the predominant
ancestry around you. You gain the Adopted Ancestry general feat, and you also gain one
1st-level ancestry feat from the ancestry you chose for the Adopted Ancestry feat.
HALFLING WEAPON TRICKSTER FEAT 5
HALFLING
Prerequisites Halfling Weapon Familiarity
You are particularly adept at fighting with your people’s favored weapons. Whenever you
critically succeed at an attack roll using a shortsword, a sling, or a halfling weapon, you
apply the weapon’s critical specialization effect.
9TH LEVEL
GUIDING LUCK FEAT 9
HALFLING
Prerequisites Halfling Luck
Your luck guides you to look the right way and aim your blows unerringly. You can use
Halfling Luck twice per day: once in response to its normal trigger, and once when you
fail a Perception check or attack roll instead of the normal trigger.
IRREPRESSIBLE FEAT 9
HALFLING
You are easily able to ward off attempts to play on your fears and
emotions. When you roll a success on a saving throw against an
emotion effect, you get a critical success instead. If your heritage
is gutsy halfling, when you roll a critical failure on a saving throw
against an emotion effect, you get a failure instead.
13TH LEVEL
CEASELESS SHADOWS FEAT 13
HALFLING
Prerequisites Distracting Shadows
You excel at going unnoticed, especially among a crowd. You no longer
need to have cover or be concealed to Hide or Sneak. If you would have
lesser cover from creatures, you gain cover and can Take Cover, and if
you would have cover from creatures, you gain greater cover.
HALFLING WEAPON EXPERTISE FEAT 13
HALFLING
Prerequisites Halfling, Weapon Familiarity
Your halfling affinity blends with your class training, granting you great
skill with halfling weapons. Whenever you gain a class feature that grants
you expert or greater proficiency in a given weapon or weapons, you also
gain that proficiency in the sling, halfling sling staff, shortsword, and all
halfling weapons in which you are trained.
HALFLING ADVENTURERS
Halflings’ natural wanderlust
and opportunistic nature make
them ideal adventurers. Many
people put up with their vivacious
attitudes in return for the natural
talents they provide and the
popular superstition that traveling
with a halfling is good luck.
Typical backgrounds for
halflings include acrobat,
criminal, emissary, entertainer,
laborer, and street urchin.
Halflings make great clerics
and rogues, but many also
become monks or rangers.
Ancestries & backgrounds 2
53
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Humans’ ambition, versatility, and exceptional potential
have led to their status as the world’s predominant ancestry.
Their empires and nations are vast, sprawling things,
and their citizens carve names for themselves with the
strength of their sword arms and the power of their spells.
Humanity is diverse and tumultuous, running the gamut
from nomadic to imperial, sinister to saintly. Many of
them venture forth to explore, to map the expanse of
the multiverse, to search for long-lost treasure, or to
lead mighty armies to conquer their neighbors—for
no better reason than because they can.
If you want a character who can be
just about anything, you should play
a human.
You Might...
• Strive to achieve
greatness, either in
your own right or on
behalf of a cause.
• Seek to understand your
purpose in the world.
• Cherish your relationships
with family and friends.
Others Probably...
• Respect your flexibility, your
adaptability, and—in most cases—
your open-mindedness.
• Distrust your intentions, fearing
you seek only power or wealth.
• Aren’t sure what to expect
from you and are hesitant to
assume your intentions.
Physical Description
Humans’ physical characteristics
are as varied as the world’s
climes. Humans have a wide variety of skin and hair
colors, body types, and facial features. Generally
speaking, their skin has a darker hue the closer to
the equator they or their ancestors lived.
Humans reach physical adulthood around
the age of 15, though mental maturity occurs a
few years later. A typical human can live to be around 90
years old. Humans often intermarry with people of other
Human
As unpredictable and varied as any of Golarion’s peoples, humans have exceptional drive
and the capacity to endure and expand. Though many civilizations thrived before humanity
rose to prominence, humans have built some of the greatest and the most terrible societies
throughout the course of history, and today they are the most populous people in the
realms around the Inner Sea.
ancestries, giving rise to children who bear the traits of
both parents. The most notable half-humans are half-elves
and half-orcs.
Society
Human variety also manifests in terms of their
governments, attitudes, and social norms.
Though the oldest of human cultures can
trace their shared histories thousands of years
into the past,
when compared
to the societies
of the elves or
dwarves, human
civilizations seem in a
state of constant flux as
empires fragment and new
kingdoms subsume the old.
Alignment and Religion
Humanity is perhaps the most
heterogeneous of all the ancestries,
with a capacity for great evil and boundless
good. Some humans assemble into vast
raging hordes, while others build
sprawling cities. Considered as a whole,
most humans are neutral, yet they
tend to congregate into nations or
communities of a shared alignment,
or at least a shared tendency
toward an alignment. Humans
also worship a wide range
of gods and practice many
different religions, tending to
seek favor from any divine
being they encounter.
Names
Unlike many ancestral cultures, which
generally cleave to specific traditions and
shared histories, humanity’s diversity has resulted
in a near-infinite set of names. The humans of
northern tribes have different names than those
dwelling in southern nation-states. Humans
throughout much of the world speak Common
(though some continents on Golarion have
Core Rulebook
54
their own regional common languages), yet their names are as varied as their beliefs
and appearances.
Ethnicities
 A variety of human ethnic groups—many of which have origins on distant lands—
populates the continents bordering Golarion’s Inner Sea. Human characters can be
any of these ethnicities, regardless of what lands they call home. Information about
Golarion’s human ethnicities appears on page 430 in Chapter 8.
Characters of human ethnicities in the Inner Sea region speak Common (also known
as Taldane), and some ethnicities grant access to an uncommon language.
Half-Elves
A half-elf is born to an elf and a human, or to two half-elves. The life of a half-elf
can be difficult, often marked by a struggle to fit in. Half-elves don’t have their own
homeland on Golarion, nor are populations of half-elves particularly tied to one
another, since they often have very disparate human and elven traditions. Instead,
most half-elves attempt to find acceptance in either human or elven settlements.
Half-elves often appear primarily human, with subtly pointed ears and a taller
stature than most full-blooded humans. Half-elves lack the almost alien eyes of their
elf parents, though they do have a natural presence—and often a striking beauty—
that leads many to become artists or entertainers. Despite this innate appeal, many
half-elves have difficulty forming lasting bonds with either humans or elves due to the
distance they feel from both peoples as a whole.
Half-elves live longer than other humans, often reaching an age around 150 years.
This causes some of them to fear friendship and romance with humans, knowing
that they’ll likely outlive their companions.
Playing a Half-Elf
You can create a half-elf character by selecting the half-elf heritage at 1st level. This
gives you access to elf and half-elf ancestry feats in addition to human ancestry feats.
You Might...
• Keep to yourself and find it difficult to form close bonds with others.
• Strongly embrace or reject one side or the other of your parentage.
• Identify strongly with and relate to other people with mixed ancestries.
Others Probably...
• Find you more attractive than humans and more approachable than elves.
• Dismiss your human ethnicity and culture in light of your elven heritage.
• Downplay the challenges of being caught between two cultures.
Half-Orcs
A half-orc is the offspring of a human and an orc, or of two half-orcs. Because some
intolerant people see orcs as more akin to monsters than people, they sometimes
hate and fear half-orcs simply due to their lineage. This commonly pushes half-orcs
to the margins of society, where some find work in manual labor or as mercenaries,
and others fall into crime or cruelty. Many who can’t stand the indignities heaped on
them in human society find a home among their orc kin or trek into the wilderness
to live in peace, apart from society’s judgment.
Humans often assume half-orcs are unintelligent or uncivilized, and half-orcs rarely
find acceptance among societies with many such folk. To an orc tribe, a half-orc is
considered smart enough to make a good war leader but weaker physically than other
orcs. Many half-orcs thus end up having low status among orc tribes unless they can
prove their strength.
Hit Points
8
Size
Medium
Speed
25 feet
Ability Boosts
Two free ability boosts
Languages
Common
Additional languages equal to
your Intelligence modifier (if it’s
positive). Choose from the list of
common languages and any other
languages to which you have
access (such as the languages
prevalent in your region).
Traits
Human
Humanoid
OTHER HALVES
By default, half-elves and
half-orcs descend from
humans, but your GM might
allow you to be the offspring
of an elf, orc, or different
ancestry. In these cases, the
GM will let you select the
half-elf or half-orc heritage
as the heritage for this other
ancestry. The most likely
other parent of a half-elf
are gnomes and halflings,
and the most likely parents
of a half-orc are goblins,
halflings, and dwarves.
Ancestries & backgrounds 2
55
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
A half-orc has a shorter lifespan than other humans,
living to be roughly 70 years old.
Playing a Half-Orc
You can create a half-orc character by selecting the
half-orc heritage at 1st level. This gives you access to
orc and half-orc ancestry feats in addition to human
ancestry feats.
You Might...
• Ignore, embrace, or actively counter the common
stereotypes about half-orcs.
• Make the most of your size and strength, either
physically or socially.
• Keep your distance from people of most other
ancestries, in case they unfairly reject you due to
your orc ancestors.
Others Probably...
• Assume you enjoy and excel at fighting but aren’t
inclined toward magical or intellectual pursuits.
• Pity you for the tragic circumstances they assume
were involved in your birth.
• Get out of your way and back down rather than
face your anger.
Human Heritages
Unlike other ancestries, humans don’t have significant
physiological differences defined by their lineage. Instead,
their heritages either reveal their potential as a people or
reflect lineages from multiple ancestries. Choose one of the
following human heritages at 1st level.
Half-Elf
Either one of your parents was an elf, or one or both
were half-elves. You have pointed ears and other telltale
signs of elf heritage. You gain the elf trait and low-light
vision. In addition, you can select elf, half-elf, and
human feats whenever you gain an ancestry feat.
Half-Orc
One of your parents was an orc, or one or both were
half-orcs. You have a green tinge to your skin and
other indicators of orc heritage. You gain the orc
trait and low-light vision. In addition, you can select
orc, half-orc, and human feats whenever you gain an
ancestry feat.
Skilled Heritage
Your ingenuity allows you to train in a wide variety of
skills. You become trained in one skill of your choice.
At 5th level, you become an expert in the chosen skill.
Versatile Heritage
Humanity’s versatility and ambition have fueled its
ascendance to be the most common ancestry in most
nations throughout the world. Select a general feat of
your choice for which you meet the prerequisites (as with
your ancestry feat, you can select this general feat at any
point during character creation).
Human Ancestry Feats
At 1st level, you gain one ancestry feat, and you gain an
additional ancestry feat every 4 levels thereafter (at 5th,
9th, 13th, and 17th levels). As a human, you choose from
among the following ancestry feats.
Core Rulebook
56
1ST LEVEL
ADAPTED CANTRIP FEAT 1
HUMAN
Prerequisites spellcasting class feature
Through study of multiple magical traditions, you’ve altered
a spell to suit your spellcasting style. Choose one cantrip
from a magical tradition other than your own. If you have a
spell repertoire or a spellbook, replace one of the cantrips you
know or have in your spellbook with the chosen spell. If you
prepare spells without a spellbook (if you’re a cleric or druid,
for example), one of your cantrips must always be the chosen
spell, and you prepare the rest normally. You can cast this
cantrip as a spell of your class’s tradition.
If you swap or retrain this cantrip later, you can choose its
replacement from the same alternate tradition or a different one.
COOPERATIVE NATURE FEAT 1
HUMAN
The short human life span lends perspective and has taught
you from a young age to set aside differences and work with
others to achieve greatness. You gain a +4 circumstance
bonus on checks to Aid.
GENERAL TRAINING FEAT 1
HUMAN
Your adaptability manifests in your mastery of a range of
useful abilities. You gain a 1st-level general feat. You must
meet the feat’s prerequisites, but if you select this feat during
character creation, you can select the feat later in the process
in order to determine which prerequisites you meet.
Special You can select this feat multiple times, choosing a
different feat each time.
HAUGHTY OBSTINACY FEAT 1
HUMAN
Your powerful ego makes it harder for others to order you
around. If you roll a success on a saving throw against a
mental effect that attempts to directly control your actions,
you critically succeed instead. If a creature rolls a failure on a
check to Coerce you using Intimidation, it gets a critical failure
instead (so it can’t try to Coerce you again for 1 week).
NATURAL AMBITION FEAT 1
HUMAN
You were raised to be ambitious and always reach for the stars,
leading you to progress quickly in your chosen field. You gain a
1st-level class feat for your class. You must meet the prerequisites,
but you can select the feat later in the character creation process
in order to determine which prerequisites you meet.
NATURAL SKILL FEAT 1
HUMAN
Your ingenuity allows you to learn a wide variety of skills. You
gain the trained proficiency rank in two skills of your choice.
UNCONVENTIONAL WEAPONRY FEAT 1
HUMAN
You’ve familiarized yourself with a particular weapon, potentially
from another ancestry or culture. Choose an uncommon simple
or martial weapon with a trait corresponding to an ancestry
(such as dwarf, goblin, or orc) or that is common in another
culture. You gain access to that weapon, and for the purpose of
determining your proficiency, that weapon is a simple weapon.
If you are trained in all martial weapons, you can choose
an uncommon advanced weapon with such a trait. You gain
access to that weapon, and for the purpose of determining your
proficiency, that weapon is a martial weapon.
5TH LEVEL
ADAPTIVE ADEPT FEAT 5
HUMAN
Prerequisites Adapted Cantrip, can cast 3rd-level spells
You’ve continued adapting your magic to blend your class’s
tradition with your adapted tradition. Choose a cantrip or
1st-level spell from the same magical tradition as your cantrip
from Adapted Cantrip. You gain that spell, adding it to your spell
repertoire, spellbook, or prepared spells just like the cantrip from
Adapted Spell. You can cast this spell as a spell of your class’s
magical tradition. If you choose a 1st-level spell, you don’t gain
access to the heightened versions of that spell, meaning you can’t
prepare them if you prepare spells and you can’t learn them or
select the spell as a signature spell if you have a spell repertoire.
CLEVER IMPROVISER FEAT 5
HUMAN
You’ve learned how to handle situations when you’re out of
your depth. You gain the Untrained Improvisation general
feat. In addition, you can attempt skill actions that normally
require you to be trained, even if you are untrained.
9TH LEVEL
COOPERATIVE SOUL FEAT 9
HUMAN
Prerequisites Cooperative Nature
You have developed a soul-deep bond with your comrades and
maintain an even greater degree of cooperation with them. If you
are at least an expert in the skill you are Aiding, you get a success
on any outcome rolled to Aid other than a critical success.
INCREDIBLE IMPROVISATION [free-action] FEAT 9
HUMAN
Prerequisites Clever Improviser
Frequency once per day
Trigger You attempt a check using a skill you’re untrained in.
A stroke of brilliance gives you a major advantage with a skill
despite your inexperience. Gain a +4 circumstance bonus to
the triggering skill check.
Ancestries & backgrounds 2
57
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
MULTITALENTED FEAT 9
HUMAN
You’ve learned to split your focus between multiple classes
with ease. You gain a 2nd-level multiclass dedication feat
(for more about multiclass archetypes, see page 219), even if
you normally couldn’t take another dedication feat until you
take more feats from your current archetype.
If you’re a half-elf, you don’t need to meet the feat’s ability
score prerequisites.
13TH LEVEL
UNCONVENTIONAL EXPERTISE FEAT 13
HUMAN
Prerequisites Unconventional Weaponry, trained in the weapon
you chose for Unconventional Weaponry
You’ve continued to advance your powers using your
unconventional weapon. Whenever you gain a class feature
that grants you expert or greater proficiency in certain
weapons, you also gain that proficiency in the weapon you
chose for Unconventional Weaponry.
Half-Elf and Half-Orc
Ancestry Feats
A human with elf or orc blood is called a half-elf
or half-orc, respectively, which is represented by the
corresponding heritage. If you have the half-elf or half-orc
heritage, you can select from additional ancestry feats not
available to other humans.
Half-Elf Ancestry Feats
The following feats are available to half-elves.
1ST LEVEL
ELF ATAVISM FEAT 1
HALF-ELF
Your elven blood runs particularly strong, granting you features
far more elven than those of a typical half-elf. You may also
have been raised among elves, steeped in your elven ancestors’
heritage. You gain the benefits of the elf heritage of your elven
parent or ancestors. You typically can’t select a heritage that
depends on or improves an elven feature you don’t have. For
example, you couldn’t gain the cavern elf’s darkvision ability
if you didn’t have low-light vision. In these cases, at the GM’s
discretion, you might gain a different benefit.
Special You can take this feat only at 1st level, and you
can’t retrain out of this feat or into this feat.
5TH LEVEL
INSPIRE IMITATION FEAT 5
HALF-ELF
 Your own actions inspire your allies to great
achievements. Whenever you critically succeed at
a skill check, you automatically qualify to use the Aid
reaction when attempting to help an ally using the same
skill, even without spending an action to prepare to do so.
SUPERNATURAL CHARM FEAT 5
HALF-ELF
The elven magic in your blood manifests as a force you can use
Core Rulebook
58
to become more appealing or alluring. You can cast 1st-level
charm as an arcane innate spell once per day.
Half-Orc Ancestry Feats
The following feats are available to half-orcs. Some of
these feats are common to people with orc blood, and
have the orc trait, while others are specific to half-orcs
and have the half-orc trait.
1ST LEVEL
MONSTROUS PEACEMAKER FEAT 1
HALF-ORC
Your dual human and orc nature has given you a unique
perspective, allowing you to bridge the gap between humans
and the many intelligent creatures in the world that humans
consider monsters. You gain a +1 circumstance bonus
to Diplomacy checks against non-humanoid intelligent
creatures and against humanoids that are marginalized in
human society (at the GM’s discretion, but typically at least
including giants, goblins, kobolds, and orcs). You also gain
this bonus on Perception checks to Sense the Motives of
such creatures.
ORC FEROCITY [reaction] FEAT 1
ORC
Frequency once per day
Trigger You would be reduced to 0 Hit Points but not
immediately killed.
Fierceness in battle runs through your blood, and you refuse to
fall from your injuries. You avoid being knocked out and remain
at 1 Hit Point, and your wounded condition increases by 1.
ORC SIGHT FEAT 1
HALF-ORC
Prerequisites low-light vision
Your orc blood is strong enough to grant you the keen vision of
your orc forebears. You gain darkvision, allowing you to see in
darkness and dim light just as well as you can in bright light.
However, in darkness, you see in black and white only.
Special You can take this feat only at 1st level, and you can’t
retrain out of this feat or into this feat.
ORC SUPERSTITION [reaction] FEAT 1
CONCENTRATE ORC
Trigger You attempt a saving throw against a spell or magical
effect, before rolling.
You defend yourself against magic by relying on techniques
derived from orc cultural superstitions. You gain a +1
circumstance bonus to your saving throw against the
triggering spell or magical effect.
ORC WEAPON FAMILIARITY FEAT 1
ORC
In combat, you favor the brutal weapons that are traditional
for your orc ancestors. You are trained with the falchion
and greataxe. In addition, you gain access to all uncommon
orc weapons.
For you, martial orc weapons are simple weapons, and
advanced orc weapons are martial weapons.
5TH LEVEL
ORC WEAPON CARNAGE FEAT 5
ORC
Prerequisites Orc Weapon Familiarity
You are brutally efficient with the weapons of your orc
ancestors. Whenever you critically hit using a falchion, a
greataxe, or an orc weapon, you apply the weapon’s critical
specialization effect.
VICTORIOUS VIGOR [reaction] FEAT 5
ORC
Trigger You bring a foe to 0 Hit Points.
Your victories in battle fill you with pride and imbue you
with the energy to fight a bit longer despite your wounds.
You gain temporary Hit Points equal to your Constitution
modifier until the end of your next turn.
9TH LEVEL
PERVASIVE SUPERSTITION FEAT 9
ORC
Prerequisites Orc Superstition
You steep yourself in superstition and practice ancient orc
mental exercises for shrugging off the effects of magic. You
gain a +1 circumstance bonus to saving throws against spells
and magical effects at all times.
13TH LEVEL
INCREDIBLE FEROCITY FEAT 13
ORC
Prerequisites Orc Ferocity
Given time to collect yourself after a near-death scrape, you
can rebuild your ferocity and withstand additional finishing
blows. You can use Orc Ferocity with a frequency of once per
hour, rather than once per day.
ORC WEAPON EXPERTISE FEAT 13
ORC
Prerequisites Orc Weapon Familiarity
Your orc affinity blends with your class training, granting
you great skill with orc weapons. Whenever you gain a class
feature that grants you expert or greater proficiency in a
given weapon or weapons, you also gain that proficiency in
the falchion, the greataxe, and all orc weapons in which you
are trained.
Ancestries & backgrounds 2
59
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
At 1st level when you create your character, you gain a
background of your choice. This decision is permanent;
you can’t change it at later levels. Each background listed
here grants two ability boosts, a skill feat, and the trained
proficiency rank in two skills, one of which is a Lore skill.
If you gain the trained proficiency rank in a skill from your
background and would then gain the trained proficiency
rank in the same skill from your class at 1st level, you
instead become trained in another skill of your choice.
Lore skills represent deep knowledge of a specific
subject and are described on page 247. If a Lore skill
involves a choice (for instance, a choice of terrain), explain
your preference to the GM, who has final say on whether
it’s acceptable or not. If you’d like some suggestions, the
Common Lore Subcategories sidebar on page 248 lists a
number of Lore skills that are suitable for most campaigns.
Skill feats expand the functions of your skills and
appear in Chapter 5: Feats.
ACOLYTE BACKGROUND
You spent your early days in a religious monastery or
cloister. You may have traveled out into the world to spread
the message of your religion or because you cast away the
teachings of your faith, but deep down you’ll always carry
within you the lessons you learned.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Intelligence or
Wisdom, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Religion skill and the Scribing Lore
skill. You gain the Student of the Canon skill feat.
ACROBAT BACKGROUND
In a circus or on the streets, you earned your pay by
performing as an acrobat. You might have turned to
adventuring when the money dried up, or simply decided to
put your skills to better use.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Strength or
Dexterity, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Acrobatics skill and the Circus Lore
skill. You gain the Steady Balance skill feat.
ANIMAL WHISPERER BACKGROUND
You have always felt a connection to animals, and it was
only a small leap to learn to train them. As you travel, you
continuously encounter different creatures, befriending them
along the way.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Wisdom or
Charisma, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Nature skill and a Lore skill related to
one terrain inhabited by animals you like (such as Plains Lore
or Swamp Lore). You gain the Train Animal skill feat.
ARTISAN BACKGROUND
As an apprentice, you practiced a particular form of building
or crafting, developing specialized skill. You might have been
a blacksmith’s apprentice toiling over the forge for countless
hours, a young tailor sewing garments of all kinds, or a
shipwright shaping the hulls of ships.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Strength or
Intelligence, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Crafting skill and the Guild Lore skill.
You gain the Specialty Crafting skill feat.
ARTIST BACKGROUND
Your art is your greatest passion, whatever form it takes.
Adventuring might help you find inspiration, or simply be a
way to survive until you become a world-famous artist.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Dexterity or
Charisma, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Crafting skill and the Art Lore skill. You
gain the Specialty Crafting skill feat.
BARKEEP BACKGROUND
You have five specialties: hefting barrels, drinking, polishing
steins, drinking, and drinking. You worked in a bar, where you
learned how to hold your liquor and rowdily socialize.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Constitution or
Charisma, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Diplomacy skill and the Alcohol Lore
skill. You gain the Hobnobber skill feat.
BARRISTER BACKGROUND
Piles of legal manuals, stern teachers, and experience in the
courtroom have instructed you in legal matters. You’re capable
of mounting a prosecution or defense in court, and you tend
to keep abreast of local laws, as you never can tell when you
might need to know them on short notice.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Intelligence or
Charisma, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Diplomacy skill and the Legal Lore skill.
You gain the Group Impression skill feat.
Backgrounds
Backgrounds allow you to customize your character based on their life before adventuring.
This is the next step in their life story after their ancestry, which reflects the circumstances
of their birth. Your character’s background can help you learn or portray more about their
personality while also suggesting what sorts of things they’re likely to know. Consider
what events set your character on their path to the life of an adventurer and how those
circumstances relate to their background.
Core Rulebook
60
BOUNTY HUNTER BACKGROUND
Bringing in lawbreakers lined your pockets. Maybe you had an
altruistic motive and sought to bring in criminals to make the
streets safer, or maybe the coin was motivation enough. Your
techniques for hunting down criminals transfer easily to the
life of an adventurer.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Strength or
Wisdom, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Survival skill and the Legal Lore skill.
You gain the Experienced Tracker skill feat.
CHARLATAN BACKGROUND
You traveled from place to place, peddling false fortunes and
snake oil in one town, pretending to be royalty in exile to seduce
a wealthy heir in the next. Becoming an adventurer might be
your next big scam or an attempt to put your talents to use for a
greater cause. Perhaps it’s a bit of both, as you realize that after
pretending to be a hero, you’ve become the mask.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Intelligence or
Charisma, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Deception skill and the Underworld
Lore skill. You gain the Charming Liar skill feat.
CRIMINAL BACKGROUND
As an unscrupulous independent or as a member of an
underworld organization, you lived a life of crime. You might
have become an adventurer to seek redemption, to escape the
law, or simply to get access to bigger and better loot.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Dexterity or
Intelligence, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Stealth skill and the Underworld Lore
skill. You gain the Experienced Smuggler skill feat.
DETECTIVE BACKGROUND
You solved crimes as a police inspector or took jobs for
wealthy clients as a private investigator. You might have
become an adventurer as part of your next big mystery,
but likely it was due to the consequences or aftermath of
a prior case.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Intelligence or
Wisdom, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Society skill and the Underworld Lore
skill. You gain the Streetwise skill feat.
EMISSARY BACKGROUND
As a diplomat or messenger, you traveled to lands far and
wide. Communicating with new people and forming alliances
were your stock and trade.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Intelligence or
Charisma, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Society skill and a Lore skill related
to one city you’ve visited often. You gain the Multilingual
skill feat.
ENTERTAINER BACKGROUND
Through an education in the arts or sheer dogged practice,
Ancestries & backgrounds 2
61
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
you learned to entertain crowds. You might have been an
actor, a dancer, a musician, a street magician, or any other
sort of performer.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Dexterity or
Charisma, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Performance skill and the Theater Lore
skill. You gain the Fascinating Performance skill feat.
FARMHAND BACKGROUND
With a strong back and an understanding of seasonal cycles,
you tilled the land and tended crops. Your farm could have
been razed by invaders, you could have lost the family tying
you to the land, or you might have simply tired of the drudgery,
but at some point you became an adventurer.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Constitution or
Wisdom, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Athletics skill and the Farming Lore
skill. You gain the Assurance skill feat with Athletics.
FIELD MEDIC BACKGROUND
In the chaotic rush of battle, you learned to adapt to rapidly
changing conditions as you administered to battle casualties.
You patched up soldiers, guards, or other combatants, and
learned a fair amount about the logistics of war.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Constitution or
Wisdom, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Medicine skill and the Warfare Lore
skill. You gain the Battle Medic skill feat.
FORTUNE TELLER BACKGROUND
The strands of fate are clear to you, as you have learned many
traditional forms by which laypeople can divine the future.
You might have used these skills to guide your community, or
simply to make money. But even the slightest peek into these
practices connects you to the occult mysteries of the universe.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Intelligence or
Charisma, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Occultism skill and the Fortune-Telling
Lore skill. You gain the Oddity Identification skill feat.
GAMBLER BACKGROUND
The thrill of the win drew you into games of chance. This
might have been a lucrative sideline that paled in comparison
to the real risks of adventuring, or you might have fallen on
hard times due to your gambling and pursued adventuring as
a way out of a spiral.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Dexterity or
Charisma, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Deception skill and the Games Lore
skill. You gain the Lie to Me skill feat.
GLADIATOR BACKGROUND
The bloody games of the arena taught you the art of combat.
Before you attained true fame, you departed—or escaped—the
arena to explore the world. Your skill at drawing both blood
and a crowd’s attention pay off in a new adventuring life.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Strength or
Charisma, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Performance skill and the Gladiatorial
Lore skill. You gain the Impressive Performance skill feat.
GUARD BACKGROUND
You served in the guard, out of either patriotism or the need for
coin. Either way, you know how to get a difficult suspect to talk.
However you left the guard, you might think of adventuring as
a way to use your skills on a wider stage.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Strength or
Charisma, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Intimidation skill and the Legal Lore or
Warfare Lore skill. You gain the Quick Coercion skill feat.
HERBALIST BACKGROUND
As a formally trained apothecary or a rural practitioner of folk
medicine, you learned the healing properties of various herbs.
You’re adept at collecting the right natural cures in all sorts of
environments and preparing them properly.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Constitution or
Wisdom, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Nature skill and the Herbalism Lore
skill. You gain the Natural Medicine skill feat.
HERMIT BACKGROUND
In an isolated place—like a cave, remote oasis, or secluded
mansion—you lived a life of solitude. Adventuring might
represent your first foray out among other people in some time.
This might be a welcome reprieve from solitude or an unwanted
change, but in either case, you’re likely still rough around
the edges.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Constitution or
Intelligence, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Nature or Occultism skill, plus a Lore
skill related to the terrain you lived in as a hermit (such as Cave
Lore or Desert Lore). You gain the Dubious Knowledge skill feat.
HUNTER BACKGROUND
You stalked and took down animals and other creatures of
the wild. Skinning animals, harvesting their flesh, and cooking
them were also part of your training, all of which can give you
useful resources while you adventure.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Dexterity or
Wisdom, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Survival skill and the Tanning Lore
skill. You gain the Survey Wildlife skill feat.
LABORER BACKGROUND
You’ve spent years performing arduous physical labor. It was
a difficult life, but you somehow survived. You may have
embraced adventuring as an easier method to make your
way in the world, or you might adventure under someone
else’s command.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Strength or
Constitution, and one is a free ability boost.
Core Rulebook
62
You’re trained in the Athletics skill and the Labor Lore skill.
You gain the Hefty Hauler skill feat in Athletics.
MARTIAL DISCIPLE BACKGROUND
You dedicated yourself to intense training and rigorous
study to become a great warrior. The school you attended
might have been a traditionalist monastery, an elite
military academy, or the local branch of a prestigious
mercenary organization.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Strength or
Dexterity, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in your choice of the Acrobatics or Athletics
skill. You gain a skill feat: Cat Fall if you chose Acrobatics or
Quick Jump if you chose Athletics. You’re also trained in the
Warfare Lore skill.
MERCHANT BACKGROUND
In a dusty shop, market stall, or merchant caravan, you
bartered wares for coin and trade goods. The skills you picked
up still apply in the adventuring life, in which a good deal on a
suit of armor could prevent your death.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Intelligence or
Charisma, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Diplomacy skill and the Mercantile
Lore skill. You gain the Bargain Hunter skill feat.
MINER BACKGROUND
You earned a living wrenching precious minerals from the
lightless depths of the earth. Adventuring might have seemed
lucrative or glamorous compared to this backbreaking labor—
and if you have to head back underground, this time you plan
to do so armed with a real weapon instead of a miner’s pick.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Strength or
Wisdom, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Survival skill and the Mining
Lore skill. You gain the Terrain Expertise skill feat with
underground terrain.
NOBLE BACKGROUND
To the common folk, the life of a noble seems
one of idyllic luxury, but growing up
as a noble or member of the aspiring
gentry, you know the reality: a noble’s
lot is obligation and intrigue. Whether
you seek to escape your duties by
adventuring or to better your station,
you have traded silks and pageantry for
an adventurer’s life.
Choose two ability boosts. One
must be to Intelligence or Charisma,
and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Society
skill and your choice of the
Genealogy Lore or Heraldry Lore
skill. You gain the Courtly Graces
skill feat.
NOMAD BACKGROUND
Traveling far and wide, you picked up basic tactics for
surviving on the road and in unknown lands, getting by with
few supplies and even fewer comforts. As an adventurer, you
travel still, often into even more dangerous places.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Constitution or
Wisdom, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Survival skill and a Lore skill related
to one terrain you traveled in (such as Desert Lore or Swamp
Lore). You gain the Assurance skill feat with Survival.
PRISONER BACKGROUND
You might have been imprisoned for crimes (whether you were
guilty or not), or enslaved for some part of your upbringing.
In your adventuring life, you take full advantage of your
newfound freedom.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Strength or
Constitution, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Stealth skill and the Underworld Lore
skill. You gain the Experienced Smuggler skill feat.
SAILOR BACKGROUND
You heard the call of the sea from a young age. Perhaps you
signed onto a merchant’s vessel, joined the navy, or even fell
in with a crew of pirates and scalawags.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Strength or
Dexterity, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Athletics skill and the Sailing Lore skill.
You gain the Underwater Marauder skill feat.
SCHOLAR BACKGROUND
You have a knack for learning, and sequestered yourself
from the outside world to learn all you could. You read
Ancestries & backgrounds 2
63
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
about so many wondrous places and things in your books,
and always dreamed about one day seeing the real things.
Eventually, that curiosity led you to leave your studies and
become an adventurer.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Intelligence or
Wisdom, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in your choice of the Arcana, Nature,
Occultism, or Religion skill, and gain the Assurance skill
feat in your chosen skill. You’re also trained in the Academia
Lore skill.
SCOUT BACKGROUND
You called the wilderness home as you found trails and guided
travelers. Your wanderlust could have called you to the
adventuring life, or perhaps you served as a scout for soldiers
and found you liked battle.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Dexterity or
Wisdom, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Survival skill and a Lore skill related
to one terrain you scouted in (such as Forest Lore or Cavern
Lore). You gain the Forager skill feat.
STREET URCHIN BACKGROUND
You eked out a living by picking pockets on the streets of
a major city, never knowing where you’d find your next
meal. While some folk adventure for the glory, you do so
to survive.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Dexterity or
Constitution, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in Thievery and a Lore skill for the city you
lived in as a street urchin (such as Absalom Lore or Magnimar
Lore). You gain the Pickpocket skill feat.
TINKER BACKGROUND
Creating all sorts of minor inventions scratches your itch for
problem-solving. Your engineering skills take a particularly
creative bent, and no one know what you’ll come up with next.
It might be a genius device with tremendous potential... or it
might explode.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Dexterity or
Intelligence, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Crafting skill and the Engineering Lore
skill. You gain the Specialty Crafting skill feat.
WARRIOR BACKGROUND
In your younger days, you waded into battle as a mercenary,
a warrior defending a nomadic people, or a member of a
militia or army. You might have wanted to break out from
the regimented structure of these forces, or you could have
always been as independent a warrior as you are now.
Choose two ability boosts. One must be to Strength or
Constitution, and one is a free ability boost.
You’re trained in the Intimidation skill and the Warfare Lore
skill. You gain the Intimidating Glare skill feat.
Core Rulebook
64
Your ancestry entry states which languages you know at
1st level. Typically, this means you can both speak and read
these languages. Having a positive Intelligence modifier
grants a number of additional languages equal to your
Intelligence modifier. You can choose these languages
from the list presented in your character’s ancestry entry
and from those available from your region or ethnicity.
Ask your GM if there’s a language you want to select that
isn’t on these lists. If your Intelligence changes later on,
you adjust your number of languages accordingly.
The languages presented here are grouped according to
how common they are throughout the Inner Sea region.
Languages that are common are regularly encountered in
most places, even among those who aren’t native speakers.
Languages that are uncommon (see Table 2–2 and Regional
Languages) are most frequently spoken by native speakers,
but they are also spoken by certain scholars and others
interested in the associated cultures.
Druidic is a secret language, and is available only to
characters who are druids. In fact, druids are prohibited
from teaching the language to non-druids (described
further in Anathema on page 130).
It is possible for your character to learn languages later
in their adventuring career. Selecting the Multilingual feat,
for example, grants a character two new languages chosen
from those listed in Table 2–1: Common Languages and
Table 2–2: Uncommon Languages. Other abilities and
effects might grant access to common or uncommon
languages, as detailed in their descriptions.
TABLE 2—1: COMMON LANGUAGES
Language Speakers
Common Humans, dwarves, elves, halflings, and other
common ancestries
Draconic Dragons, reptilian humanoids
Dwarven Dwarves
Elven Elves, half-elves
Gnomish Gnomes
Goblin Goblins, hobgoblins, bugbears
Halfling Halflings
Jotun Giants, ogres, trolls, ettins, cyclopes
Orcish Orcs, half-orcs
Sylvan Fey, centaurs, plant creatures
Undercommon Drow, duergars, xulgaths
TABLE 2–2: UNCOMMON LANGUAGES
Language Speakers
Abyssal Demons
Aklo Deros, evil fey, otherworldly monsters
Aquan Aquatic creatures, water elemental creatures
Auran Air elemental creatures, flying creatures
Celestial Angels
Gnoll Gnolls
Ignan Fire elemental creatures
Infernal Devils
Necril Ghouls, intelligent undead
Shadowtongue Nidalese, Shadow Plane creatures
Terran Earth elemental creatures
TABLE 2–3: SECRET LANGUAGE
Language Speakers
Druidic Druids
Regional Languages
Regional languages depend on the game world you’re
playing in. Chapter 8: The Age of Lost Omens lists the
regional languages of the Pathfinder world and where
they’re spoken (page 432). These languages are uncommon.
Most characters learn the Common language. This is
the most widely used language in the region where the
campaign takes place. In the Inner Sea region of Golarion,
the Common tongue is Taldane, for example. Characters
with Common might face a language barrier if they travel
somewhere with a different Common language.
Sign Language
and Reading Lips
The language entry for most characters lists languages they
use to communicate in spoken words. However, you might
know the signed version of a language or know how to read
lips. You can learn these by taking the Sign Language and
Read Lips skill feats. If you are creating a character who is
deaf, hard of hearing, or unable to speak, discuss with your
GM whether it makes sense for your character to know sign
languages or lip reading. If so, your GM might allow you to
select one of these feats for free (even if you don’t meet the
prerequisites) to represent your character concept.
Languages
The people of the Inner Sea region speak dozens of different languages, along with
hundreds of dialects and regional variations. While a character can generally get by
with Taldane, also known as Common, knowing another language is vital in some
regions. Being able to speak these tongues can help you with negotiation, spying
on enemies, or just conducting simple commerce. Languages also afford you the
chance to contextualize your character in the world and give meaning to your other
character choices.
Ancestries & backgrounds 2
65
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Core Rulebook
66
The rules within each class allow you to bring a wealth
of character concepts to life. Perhaps you want to create
a brilliant but scatterbrained alchemist who can rattle off
complex formulas for alchemical items but has trouble
remembering his best friend’s birthday. Or perhaps you
want your character to be a muscle-bound swordswoman
who becomes as immovable as a mountain when she
hoists a shield. Maybe they’ll be a hot-tempered sorcerer
whose gesticulating fingers pulse with light from an angelic
ancestor. The choices you make for your character within
their class—such as a cleric’s choice of deity, a fighter’s
choice of weapon, or a sorcerer’s bloodline—bring these
visions to life within the context of the rules and the world.
The entries on the pages that follow describe the 12 core
classes in Pathfinder. Each entry contains the information
you need to play a character of that class, as well as to
advance them from their humble beginnings at 1st level to
the dizzying heights of power at 20th level. In addition to
the class entries, you might need to reference the following
sections, which detail additional character options and
how to advance your character in level.
• Leveling Up on page 31 tells you how to make
your character stronger when you get enough
Experience Points to reach a new level.
• Animal Companions and Familiars on page 214
provides rules to create an animal companion
or a familiar to share your adventures with. You
must have a class feature or feat that grants you a
companion or familiar to use these rules.
• Archetypes on page 219 gives you thematic
options that allow you to further customize your
character’s abilities. Though these rules are not
recommended for beginners, the archetypes in this
book allow you to gain abilities from other classes
starting at 2nd level.
Reading Class Entries
Every class entry includes information about typical
members of the class, plus suggestions for roleplaying
characters of that class and playing these characters in the
game’s various modes. Each class provides your character
with an ability boost to a key ability score; a number of
Hit Points they receive at each level; proficiency ranks for
Chapter 3: Classes
Just as your character’s ancestry plays a key role in expressing their identity and worldview,
their class indicates the training they have and will improve upon as an adventurer.
Choosing your character’s class is perhaps the most important decision you will make
for them. Groups of players often create characters whose skills and abilities complement
each other mechanically—for example, ensuring your party includes a healer, a combatoriented character, a stealthy character, and someone with command over magic—so you
may wish to discuss options with your group before deciding.
various abilities, equipment, and skills; special abilities
from their class features; and more. Your character’s class
entry also provides the information needed when they
gain levels, so it will be a vital reference throughout the
course of your campaign.
Playing the Class
The first section of each class describes the interests and
tendencies typical of that class, as well as information
on how others view them. This can help inspire you
as you determine your character’s actions and define
their personality, but you aren’t obligated to play your
character as this section describes.
Key Ability
This is the ability score that a member of your class cares
about the most. Many of your most useful and powerful
abilities are tied to this ability in some way.
For instance, this is the ability score you’ll use to
determine the Difficulty Class (DC) associated with your
character’s class features and feats. This is called your
class DC. If your character is a member of a spellcasting
class, this key ability is used to calculate spell DCs and
similar values.
Most classes are associated with one key ability score,
but some allow you to choose from two options. For
instance, if you’re a fighter, you can choose either Strength
or Dexterity as your key ability. A fighter who chooses
Strength will excel in hand-to-hand combat, while those
who choose Dexterity prefer ranged or finesse weapons.
Additionally, when you choose your character’s class,
they gain an ability boost to their key ability score,
increasing that ability score by 2. For more about ability
boosts, see page 20.
Hit Points
This section tells you how many Hit Points your
character gains from their class at each level. To
determine your character’s starting Hit Points, add
together the Hit Points they got when you chose their
ancestry and the amount listed in this entry, which
equals your Constitution modifier plus a fixed number.
Classes that intend for characters to rush into battle
with weapons bared gain a higher number of Hit Points
3
67
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
each level, while those for characters who cast spells or
engage in trickery gain fewer.
Each time your character gains a level, they increase their
maximum Hit Points by the amount listed in this entry.
For more about calculating your character’s Constitution
modifier and determining their Hit Points, see page 26.
Initial Proficiencies
When you choose your character’s class, they gain a set of
initial proficiencies. Proficiencies measure your character’s
ability to perform tasks, use abilities, and succeed at checks.
Proficiency ranks range from trained to legendary. For
instance, a character who is trained with a longbow can use it
effectively, while a person who is legendary with the weapon
might be able to split an arrow from 100 paces away!
Each class entry specifies your character’s initial
proficiency rank in Perception, saving throws, attacks,
defenses, and either spells or class DC. You gain the trained
proficiency rank in at least one skill that is important to
your class, and you can choose other skills to gain trained
proficiency in—the exact number depends on your class. If
your class would make you trained in a skill you’re already
trained in (typically due to your background), you can select
another skill to become trained in.
A proficiency rank can unlock various feats and class
features, and it also helps determine the modifier for any
check you roll or DC you calculate related to that statistic.
If your character is trained in Perception, a saving throw,
or another statistic, they gain a proficiency bonus equal
to their level + 2, while if they have expert proficiency,
they gain a proficiency bonus equal to their level + 4. For
more about proficiency ranks, see page 13.
Spellcasting classes grant a proficiency rank for spell
attacks and DCs, which are further detailed in each
class’s entry.
If something isn’t listed in your character’s class entry,
their proficiency rank in that statistic is untrained unless
they gain training from another source. If your character
is untrained in something, you add a proficiency bonus of
+0 when attempting a check or calculating a DC related
to that statistic.
Advancement Table
This table summarizes the feats, skill increases, ability boosts,
and other benefits your character gains as they advance in
level. The first column of the class table indicates a level, and
the second column lists each feature your character receives
when they reach that level. The 1st-level entry includes a
reminder to select your ancestry and background.
Class Features
This section presents all the abilities the class grants
your character. An ability gained at a higher level lists
the required level next to the ability’s name. All classes
include the class features detailed below, and each class
also gets special class features specific to it. Many class
features require you to choose between options. Unless
the specific ability states otherwise, such decisions can’t be
changed without retraining (as explained on page 481).
Class Feats
This section specifies the levels at which your character
gains class feats—special feats that only members of that
class can access. Class feats are granted beginning at 1st
or 2nd level, depending on the class. Specific class feats
are detailed at the end of each class entry.
Skill Feats
This section specifies the levels at which your character
gains feats with the skill trait, called skill feats. Skill
feats can be found in Chapter 5: Feats, beginning on
page 254. At 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter, most
classes gain a skill feat, though rogues gain them earlier
and more often. Your character must be trained in the
corresponding skill to take a skill feat.
General Feats
This section specifies the levels at which your character
gains general feats. Most classes grant a general feat at
3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter. At each of these
levels, you can select any general feat (including skill
feats) as long as your character qualifies for it. More
information can be found in Chapter 5: Feats (page 254).
Skill Increases
This section specifies the levels at which your character
can increase their proficiency rank in a skill. At 3rd level
and every 2 levels thereafter, most classes grant a skill
increase, though rogues gain them earlier and more often.
Your character can use a skill increase to either become
trained in one skill in which they’re untrained or become
an expert in one skill in which they’re already trained.
If your character is at least 7th level, they can use a skill
increase to become a master of a skill in which they’re
already an expert. If they’re at least 15th level, they can
use an increase to become legendary in a skill of which
they’re already a master.
Ability Boosts
At 5th level and every 5 levels thereafter, your character
boosts four different ability scores. Your character can
use these ability boosts to increase their ability scores
above 18. Boosting an ability score increases it by 1 if
it’s already 18 or above, or by 2 if it starts out below 18.
For more about ability boosts and applying them during
character creation, see page 20.
Ancestry Feats
This section serves as a reminder of the ancestry feats
your character gains at 5th, 9th, 13th, and 17th levels.
Ancestry feats are detailed in each ancestry entry in
Chapter 2, which begins on page 32.
Core Rulebook
68
Alchemist Page 70
The alchemist uses their skill at crafting
to create alchemical items—such as
bombs, elixirs, and poisons—that they
use to defeat foes and aid allies. Smart
and resourceful, an alchemist often has
just the right tool for the job and esoteric
knowledge to help their friends get out of a jam.
Barbarian Page 82
The barbarian is a fearsome embodiment
of rage, focusing the deadly power
of their anger against anyone who
stands in their way. A barbarian is
quick to enter battle and, once their fury
has been unleashed, is immensely strong,
often unpredictable, and nearly unstoppable.
Bard Page 94
An artist and a scholar, the bard uses
performance and esoteric learning to
bolster their companions and foil their
enemies. Sometimes sneaky and quite
often charming, the bard adventures
with pizzazz and talent backed up by
an impressive repertoire of occult magic.
Champion Page 104
A defender of good who straps on
armor and wields a righteous weapon,
the champion protects the innocent
and vanquishes evil. Steadfast in their
beliefs, and devoted to both a deity and
an aspect of good, they follow a strict code
as they fight to make the world a better place.
Cleric Page 116
The cleric is dedicated to the
worship of a single deity and draws
divine magic from this devotion.
Clerics can be vastly different
depending on who they worship, and
whether they’re cloistered clerics who
pursue one of their deity’s domains or war
priests who serve as the sword arm of their god.
Druid Page 128
The druid walks the wild, primordial
places of the world without fear,
harnessing the primal magic of nature
and controlling it with calm purpose.
A devotee of the wilderness, the druid
finds nourishment in its power, allies
among its creatures, and strength in its fury.
Fighter Page 140
With calculated daring and fearless
determination, the fighter tracks down
and confronts their enemies while
defending allies from harm. A master
of the battlefield, the fighter is quick to
exploit opportunities and strike any who
stumble within reach of their sword or bow.
Monk Page 154
The monk seeks perfection in all things,
and that includes transforming their
body into the perfect weapon. They
can be walking with calm purpose
and contemplating the subtleties
of existence in one minute and then
transform into a blur of deadly blows in the next.
Ranger Page 166
Resourceful and cunning, the ranger
is a hunter, tracker, and warrior who
preserves the natural world and
protects civilization from its ravages.
Whether they use a bow, crossbow,
a pair of weapons, or snares, the ranger
is a fearsome enemy and great ally in the wild.
Rogue Page 178
Cunning and quick, the rogue brings
skill and expertise few of their comrades
can match. In battle, they excel at
sneak attacks and ambushes. Their
racket gives them the tools they need
to get the job done, and their wide array of
skill choices lets them specialize as they see fit.
Sorcerer Page 190
The intense magic the sorcerer
commands comes from neither
study nor worship—it comes from
their blood. Their magical abilities
depend on whether they have the
blood of dragons, angels, fey, aberrant
creatures, or some other being flowing
through their veins and powering their spells.
Wizard Page 202
The wizard is the arcane master of
spellcasting, plucking incredible power
from reality through complicated
spell formulas. They stride with
confidence, without a need for armor
or weapons, enacting their will upon the
world and bringing woe upon their enemies.
69
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Core Rulebook
70
Alchemist
During combat encounters...
You lob bombs at your foes, harry your enemies, and support the rest of your party
with potent elixirs. At higher levels, your mutagens warp your body into a resilient
and powerful weapon.
During social encounters...
You provide knowledge and experience about alchemical items and related secrets,
such as poisons and diseases.
While exploring...
You keep an eye out for trouble with your bombs at the ready, while giving advice
on all things alchemical and mysterious.
In downtime...
You experiment in an alchemical lab, brewing elixirs, making bombs, and furthering
your alchemical knowledge.
You Might...
• Enjoy tinkering with strange formulas and alchemical reagents, often with a
single-minded dedication and recklessness that gives others pause.
• Get a kick out of wreaking havoc with the alchemical concoctions you’ve made,
and enjoy watching things burn, dissolve, freeze, and jolt.
• Endlessly experiment to discover new, more potent alchemical tools.
Others Probably...
• Think you’re some kind of sorcerer or an eccentric wizard and don’t understand
that you don’t cast spells; spellcasters who clumsily dabble in alchemy only
heighten this misconception.
• Don’t understand your zeal for alchemy, creativity, and invention.
• Assume that if you haven’t caused a catastrophe with your experimentations,
you inevitably will.
There’s no sight more beautiful to you than a strange brew bubbling in a beaker,
and you consume your ingenious elixirs with abandon. You’re fascinated by
uncovering the secrets of science and the natural world, and you’re constantly
experimenting in your lab or on the go with inventive concoctions for every eventuality.
You are fearless in the face of risk, hurling explosive or toxic creations at your foes. Your
unique path toward greatness is lined with alchemical brews that push your mind and body
to their limits.
INITIAL PROFICIENCIES
At 1st level, you gain the
listed proficiency ranks in
the following statistics. You
are untrained in anything
not listed unless you gain a
better proficiency rank in some
other way.
PERCEPTION
Trained in Perception
SAVING THROWS
Expert in Fortitude
Expert in Reflex
Trained in Will
SKILLS
Trained in Crafting
Trained in a number of
additional skills equal to 3 plus
your Intelligence modifier
ATTACKS
Trained in simple weapons
Trained in alchemical bombs
Trained in unarmed attacks
DEFENSES
Trained in light armor
Trained in unarmored defense
CLASS DC
Trained in alchemist class DC
Hit Points
8 plus your Constitution Modifier
You increase your maximum number of
HP by this number at 1st level and every
level thereafter.
Key Ability
INTELLIGENCE
At 1st level, your class gives you
an ability boost to Intelligence.
3
71
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
them becomes more and more powerful, you advance
in power dramatically, leaving behind those who don’t
understand your strange science.
You gain the Alchemical Crafting feat (page 258),
even if you don’t meet that feat’s prerequisites, and you
gain the four common 1st-level alchemical formulas
granted by that feat. The catalog of alchemical items
begins on page 543. You can use this feat to create
alchemical items as long as you have the items’ formulas
in your formula book.
Infused Reagents
You infuse reagents with your own alchemical essence,
allowing you to create alchemical items at no cost. Each
day during your daily preparations, you gain a number
of batches of infused reagents equal to your level + your
Intelligence modifier. You can use these reagents for either
advanced alchemy or Quick Alchemy, described below.
Together, these infused reagents have light Bulk.
As soon as you make your next daily preparations, your
infused reagents from the previous day’s preparations are
instantly destroyed, and nonpermanent effects of your
previous day’s infused items immediately end. While infused
reagents are physical objects, they can’t be duplicated,
preserved, or created in any way other than your daily
preparations. Any such artificial reagents lack the infusion
and are useless for advanced alchemy or Quick Alchemy.
Advanced Alchemy
During your daily preparations, after producing new
infused reagents, you can spend batches of those infused
reagents to create infused alchemical items. You don’t
need to attempt a Crafting check to do this, and you
ignore both the number of days typically required to
create the items and any alchemical reagent requirements.
Your advanced alchemy level is equal to your level. For
each batch of infused reagents you spend, choose an
alchemical item of your advanced alchemy level or lower
that’s in your formula book, and make a batch of two of
that item. These items have the infused trait and remain
potent for 24 hours or until your next daily preparations,
whichever comes first.
Quick Alchemy
If you need a specific alchemical item on the fly, you can
use your infused reagents to quickly create it with the
Quick Alchemy action.
QUICK ALCHEMY [ofre[one-action]
ALCHEMIST MANIPULATE
Cost 1 batch of infused reagents
Requirements You have alchemist’s tools (page 287), the formula
for the alchemical item you’re creating, and a free hand.
You swiftly mix up a short-lived alchemical item to use at
a moment’s notice. You create a single alchemical item of
your advanced alchemy level or lower that’s in your formula
TABLE 3–1: ALCHEMIST ADVANCEMENT
Your
Level Class Features
1 Ancestry and background, initial proficiencies,
alchemy, formula book, research field, alchemist feat
2 Alchemist feat, skill feat
3 General feat, skill increase
4 Alchemist feat, skill feat
5 Ability boosts, ancestry feat, field discovery,
skill increase
6 Alchemist feat, skill feat
7 Alchemical weapon expertise, general feat, iron will,
perpetual infusions, skill increase
8 Alchemist feat, skill feat
9 Alchemical expertise, alertness, ancestry feat, double
brew, skill increase
10 Ability boosts, alchemist feat, skill feat
11 General feat, juggernaut, perpetual potency, skill
increase
12 Alchemist feat, skill feat
13 Ancestry feat, greater field discovery, light armor
expertise, skill increase, weapon specialization
14 Alchemist feat, skill feat
15 Ability boosts, alchemical alacrity, evasion, general
feat, skill increase
16 Alchemist feat, skill feat
17 Alchemical mastery, ancestry feat, perpetual
perfection, skill increase
18 Alchemist feat, skill feat
19 General feat, light armor mastery, skill increase
20 Ability boosts, alchemist feat, skill feat
Class Features
You gain these abilities as an alchemist. Abilities gained
at higher levels list the levels at which you gain them next
to the features’ names.
Ancestry and Background
In addition to the abilities provided by your class at 1st
level, you have the benefits of your selected ancestry and
background, as described in Chapter 2.
Initial Proficiencies
At 1st level, you gain a number of proficiencies that
represent your basic training. These proficiencies are
noted at the start of this class.
Alchemy
You understand the complex interactions of natural
and unnatural substances and can concoct alchemical
items to meet your needs. You can do this using normal
reagents and the Craft activity, or you can use special
infused reagents that allow you to craft temporary items
quickly and at no cost. Over time, you can create more
and more alchemical items for free, and since each of
Core Rulebook
72
book without having to spend the normal monetary cost in
alchemical reagents or needing to attempt a Crafting check.
This item has the infused trait, but it remains potent only until
the start of your next turn.
Formula Book
An alchemist keeps meticulous records of the formulas
for every item they can create. You start with a standard
formula book worth 10 sp or less (as detailed on page
290) for free. The formula book contains the formulas for
two common 1st-level alchemical items of your choice, in
addition to those you gained from Alchemical Crafting
and your research field. The catalog of alchemical items
begins on page 543.
Each time you gain a level, you can add the formulas
for two common alchemical items to your formula
book. These new formulas can be for any level of item
you can create. You learn these formulas automatically,
but it’s also possible to find or buy additional formulas
in settlements or from other alchemists, or to invent them
with the Inventor feat (page 262).
Research Field
Your inquiries into the alchemical nature of the universe
have led you to focus on a particular field of research.
You might have a degree from an scientific institute,
correspond with other researchers in your field, or work
as a genius loner. Choose a field of research. The research
fields presented in this book are as follows.
Bomber
You specialize in explosions and other violent
alchemical reactions. You start with the formulas
for two 1st-level alchemical bombs in your
formula book, in addition to your other formulas.
When throwing an alchemical bomb with the splash
trait, you can deal splash damage to only your
primary target instead of the usual splash area.
Chirurgeon
You concentrate on healing others with alchemy.
You start with the formulas for two of the
following in your formula book, in addition
to your other formulas: lesser antidote, lesser
antiplague, or lesser elixir of life.
As long as your proficiency rank in Medicine is trained
or better, you can attempt a Crafting check instead of
a Medicine check for any of Medicine’s untrained and
trained uses.
Mutagenist
You focus on bizarre mutagenic transformations
that sacrifice one aspect of a creature’s physical
or psychological being in order to strengthen another.
You start with the formulas for two 1st-level mutagens
in your formula book, in addition to your other formulas.
You can gain the benefit of any mutagen, even if
it wasn’t specifically brewed for you. Whenever your
proficiency rank for simple weapons increases, your
proficiency rank for unarmed attacks increases to the
same rank unless it’s already better.
Alchemist Feats
At 1st level and every even-numbered level thereafter,
you gain an alchemist class feat. Alchemist class feats are
described beginning on page 76.
Skill Feats 2nd
At 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain
a skill feat. Skill feats can be found in Chapter 5 and
have the skill trait. You must be trained or better in the
corresponding skill to select a skill feat.
General Feats 3rd
At 3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter,
you gain a general feat. General feats are
listed in Chapter 5.
73
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Skill Increases 3rd
At 3rd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a skill
increase. You can use this increase either to increase your
proficiency rank to trained in one skill you’re untrained
in, or to increase your proficiency rank in one skill in
which you’re already trained to expert.
At 7th level, you can use skill increases to increase
your proficiency rank to master in a skill in which you’re
already an expert, and at 15th level, you can use them to
increase your proficiency rank to legendary in a skill in
which you’re already a master.
Ability Boosts 5th
At 5th level and every 5 levels thereafter, you boost four
different ability scores. You can use these ability boosts to
increase your ability scores above 18. Boosting an ability
score increases it by 1 if it’s already 18 or above, or by 2
if it starts out below 18.
Ancestry Feats 5th
In addition to the ancestry feat you started with, you gain
an ancestry feat at 5th level and every 4 levels thereafter.
The list of ancestry feats available to you can be found in
your ancestry’s entry in Chapter 2.
Field Discovery 5th
You learn a special discovery depending on your field.
Bomber: When using advanced alchemy to make
bombs during your daily preparations, you can use a
batch of reagents to create any three bombs instead of
just two of the same bomb.
Chirurgeon: When using advanced alchemy to make
elixirs of life during your daily preparations, you can
create three elixirs with each batch of reagents instead
of two.
Mutagenist: When using advanced alchemy to make
mutagens during your daily preparations, you can use a
batch of reagents to create any three mutagens instead of
just two of the same mutagen.
Alchemical Weapon Expertise 7th
You’ve trained to more effectively wield the weapons
you find in your lab. Your proficiency ranks for simple
weapons and alchemical bombs increase to expert.
Iron Will 7th
Your mental defenses are an iron fortress. Your proficiency
rank for Will saves increases to expert.
Perpetual Infusions 7th
You have learned how to create perpetual alchemical
infusions that can provide a near-infinite supply of certain
simple items. You gain the ability to create two 1st-level
alchemical items using Quick Alchemy without spending a
batch of infused reagents. The items you can select depend
on your research field and must be in your formula book.
Chirurgeon
You use alchemy for medicinal purposes, healing
and protecting others across the lands.
ABILITY SCORES
Prioritize Intelligence and Wisdom. Constitution
increases your survivability, and Dexterity helps you
hit with ranged attacks when violence is necessary.
SKILLS
Crafting, Diplomacy, Medicine, Nature, Occultism,
Religion, Society, Survival
RESEARCH FIELD
Chirurgeon
STARTING FEAT
Alchemical Savant
HIGHER-LEVEL FEATS
Poison Resistance (2nd), Efficient Alchemy (4th),
Combine Elixirs (6th), Merciful Elixir (10th), Greater
Merciful Elixir (14th), Miracle Worker (18th), Craft
Philosopher’s Stone (20th)
Core Rulebook
74
SAMPLE ALCHEMIST
Bomber: Choose two of the following formulas: lesser
acid flask, lesser alchemist’s fire, lesser bottled lightning,
lesser liquid ice, lesser tanglefoot bag, lesser thunderstone.
Chirurgeon: Lesser antidote and lesser antiplague.
Mutagenist: Choose two of the following formulas:
lesser bestial mutagen, lesser bullheaded mutagen, lesser
cognitive mutagen, lesser juggernaut mutagen, lesser
quicksilver mutagen, lesser silvertongue mutagen.
Alchemical Expertise 9th
Constant practice has increased the effectiveness of your
concoctions. Your proficiency rank for your alchemist
class DC increases to expert.
Alertness 9th
You remain alert to threats around you. Your proficiency
rank for Perception increases to expert.
Double Brew 9th
You know your formulas so well that you can concoct
two items at once. When using the Quick Alchemy
action, instead of spending one batch of infused reagents
to create a single item, you can spend up to two batches
of infused reagents to make up to two alchemical items
as described in that action. These items do not have to
be the same.
Juggernaut 11th
Your body has become accustomed to physical hazards
and resistant to pathogens and ailments. Your proficiency
rank for Fortitude saves increases to master. When you
roll a success on a Fortitude save, you get a critical
success instead.
Perpetual Potency 11th
Your perpetual infusions improve, allowing you to use
Quick Alchemy to create more powerful items with no
cost. The items you can select depend on your research
field and must be in your formula book.
Bomber: The moderate versions of the bombs you
chose for perpetual infusions.
Chirurgeon: Moderate antidote and antiplague.
Mutagenist: The moderate versions of the mutagens you
chose for perpetual infusions.
Greater Field Discovery 13th
You learn an incredible discovery that advances your
understanding of your field.
Bomber: You can increase the splash on your bombs
to damage creatures within 10 feet, or 15 feet if you have
Expanded Splash.
Chirurgeon: When you use Quick Alchemy to create
any type of elixir of life, the creature drinking the
elixir gains the maximum Hit Points possible for that
elixir, instead of rolling to determine the number of Hit
Points regained.
Mutagenist: If you imbibe another mutagen while
you are under the effects of a mutagen that you created,
you can gain the benefits and the drawbacks of both
mutagens at once, despite the fact that they both have
the polymorph trait and would not normally function
together. If you come under the effects of any further
mutagens while benefiting from two mutagens, you lose
the benefit of one of the former mutagens of your choice,
while retaining the drawbacks of all the mutagens. If
you are under the effects of two mutagens and you come
under the effect of a non-mutagen polymorph effect,
you lose the benefits of the mutagens while retaining the
drawbacks of both.
Light Armor Expertise 13th
You’ve learned how to dodge while wearing light or
no armor. Your proficiency ranks for light armor and
unarmored defense increase to expert.
Weapon Specialization 13th
You’ve learned how to inflict greater injuries with the
weapons you know best. You deal 2 additional damage
with weapons and unarmed attacks in which you are an
expert. This damage increases to 3 if you’re a master, and
to 4 if you’re legendary.
Alchemical Alacrity 15th
Your comfort in concocting items is such that you can
create three at a time. When using the Quick Alchemy
action, you can spend up to three batches of infused
reagents to make up to three alchemical items as
described in that action. These items do not have to be
the same.
KEY TERMS
You’ll see the following key terms in many alchemist
abilities.
Additive: Feats with the additive trait allow you
to spend actions to add special substances to bombs
or elixirs. You can add only one additive to a single
alchemical item, and attempting to add another spoils
the item. You can typically use actions with the additive
trait only when you’re creating an infused alchemical
item, and some can be used only with the Quick Alchemy
action. The additive trait is always followed by a level,
such as additive 2. An additive adds its level to the level
of the alchemical item you’re modifying; the result is the
new level of the mixture. The mixture’s item level must be
no higher than your advanced alchemy level.
Infused: You created an alchemical item with the
infused trait using your infused reagents, and it has a
limited time before it becomes inert. Any nonpermanent
effects from your infused alchemical items, with the
exception of afflictions such as slow-acting poisons, end
when you make your daily preparations again.
75
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Evasion 15th
You’ve learned to move quickly to avoid explosions, dragon’s breath, and worse.
Your proficiency rank for Reflex saves increases to master. When you roll a success
on a Reflex save, you get a critical success instead.
Alchemical Mastery 17th
Your alchemical concoctions are incredibly effective. Your proficiency rank for your
alchemist class DC increases to master.
Perpetual Perfection 17th
You have perfected your perpetual infusions, allowing you to use Quick Alchemy to
create even more powerful items at no cost. The items you can select depend on your
research field and must be in your formula book.
Bomber: The greater versions of the bombs you chose for perpetual infusions.
Chirurgeon: Greater antidote and antiplague.
Mutagenist: The greater versions of the mutagens you chose for perpetual infusions.
Light Armor Mastery 19th
Your skill with light armor improves, increasing your ability to dodge blows. Your
proficiency ranks for light armor and unarmored defense increase to master.
Alchemist Feats
At every level that you gain an alchemist feat, you can select one of the following
feats. You must satisfy any prerequisites before taking the feat.
1ST LEVEL
ALCHEMICAL FAMILIAR FEAT 1
ALCHEMIST
You have used alchemy to create life, a simple creature formed from alchemical materials,
reagents, and a bit of your own blood. This alchemical familiar appears to be a small
creature of flesh and blood, though it might have some unusual or distinguishing aspects
depending on your creative process. Like other familiars, your alchemical familiar assists
you in your laboratory and on adventures. The familiar uses your Intelligence modifier to
determine its Perception, Acrobatics, and Stealth modifiers (see Familiars on page 217 for
more information).
ALCHEMICAL SAVANT FEAT 1
ALCHEMIST
Prerequisites trained in Crafting
You can identify alchemical items quickly. When using the Crafting skill to Identify Alchemy
on an alchemical item you hold, you can do so as a single action, which has the concentrate
and manipulate traits, instead of spending 10 minutes. If you have the formula for the item
you are attempting to identify, you gain a +2 circumstance bonus to your check, and if you
roll a critical failure, you get a failure instead.
FAR LOBBER FEAT 1
ALCHEMIST
You’ve learned how to throw a longer distance. When you throw an alchemical bomb, it has
a range increment of 30 feet instead of the usual 20 feet.
QUICK BOMBER [one-action] FEAT 1
ALCHEMIST
You keep your bombs in easy-to-reach pouches from which you draw without thinking. You
Interact to draw a bomb, then Strike with it.
ALCHEMIST FEATS
If you need to look up an
alchemist feat by name instead
of by level, use this table.
Feat Level
Alchemical Familiar 1
Alchemical Savant 1
Calculated Splash 4
Combine Elixirs 6
Craft Philosopher’s Stone 20
Debilitating Bomb 6
Directional Bombs 6
Efficient Alchemy 4
Elastic Mutagen 10
Enduring Alchemy 4
Eternal Elixir 16
Expanded Splash 10
Exploitive Bomb 16
Extend Elixir 12
Far Lobber 1
Feral Mutagen 8
Genius Mutagen 16
Glib Mutagen 14
Greater Debilitating Bomb 10
Greater Merciful Elixir 14
Improbable Elixirs 18
Invincible Mutagen 12
Mega Bomb 20
Merciful Elixir 10
Mindblank Mutagen 18
Miracle Worker 18
Perfect Debilitation 18
Perfect Mutagen 20
Persistent Mutagen 16
Poison Resistance 2
Potent Poisoner 10
Powerful Alchemy 8
Quick Bomber 1
Revivifying Mutagen 2
Smoke Bomb 2
Sticky Bomb 8
True Debilitating Bomb 14
Uncanny Bombs 12
Core Rulebook
76
2ND LEVEL
POISON RESISTANCE FEAT 2
ALCHEMIST
Repeated exposure to toxic reagents has fortified your body
against poisons of all kinds. You gain poison resistance equal
to half your level, and you gain a +1 status bonus to saving
throws against poisons.
REVIVIFYING MUTAGEN FEAT 2
ALCHEMIST
While under the effect of a mutagen, you can metabolize that
mutagen’s power to heal yourself. This uses a single action,
which has the concentrate and manipulate traits. Once the
action is complete, you regain 1d6 Hit Points for every 2
item levels of the mutagen (minimum 1d6), but the mutagen’s
duration immediately ends, even if you are under the effect of
Persistent Mutagen.
SMOKE BOMB [free-action] FEAT 2
ADDITIVE 1 ALCHEMIST
Frequency once per round
Trigger You use Quick Alchemy to craft an alchemical bomb with
a level at least 1 lower than your advanced alchemy level.
You cause the bomb to create a cloud of thick smoke, in
addition to its normal effects. When thrown, the bomb creates
a cloud of smoke in a 10-foot-radius burst. You choose which
corner of the target’s space (or the space in which the bomb
lands) the cloud is centered on. Creatures within that area have
the concealed condition, and all other creatures are concealed
to them. The smoke lasts for 1 minute or until dissipated by a
strong wind.
4TH LEVEL
CALCULATED SPLASH FEAT 4
ALCHEMIST
You have calculated all the angles to maximize a bomb’s
splash. When you throw an alchemical bomb with the splash
trait, you can cause the bomb to deal splash damage equal
to your Intelligence modifier (minimum 0) instead of the
normal amount.
EFFICIENT ALCHEMY FEAT 4
ALCHEMIST
Thanks to the time you’ve spent studying and experimenting,
you know how to scale your formulas into larger batches
that don’t require any additional attention. When spending
downtime to Craft alchemical items, you can produce twice
as many alchemical items in a single batch without spending
additional preparatory time. For instance, if you are creating
elixirs of life, you can craft up to eight elixirs in a single batch
using downtime, rather than four. This does not reduce the
amount of alchemical reagents required or other ingredients
needed to craft each item, nor does it increase your rate of
progress for days past the base downtime spent. This also
does not change the number of items you can create in a batch
using advanced alchemy.
77
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SAMPLE ALCHEMIST ENDURING ALCHEMY FEAT 4
ALCHEMIST
You’ve learned how to make your personal energy last just
a little bit longer when quickly brewing ad hoc concoctions.
When using Quick Alchemy to create an alchemical tool or
elixir, that tool or elixir remains potent until the end of your
next turn, instead of losing its potency at the start of your
next turn.
6TH LEVEL
COMBINE ELIXIRS [free-action] FEAT 6
ADDITIVE 2 ALCHEMIST
Frequency once per round
Trigger You use Quick Alchemy to craft an alchemical item
that has the elixir trait and is at least 2 levels lower than
your advanced alchemy level.
You’ve discovered how to mix two elixirs into a single hybrid
concoction. You can spend 2 additional batches of infused
reagents to add a second elixir to the one you’re crafting.
The second elixir must also be at least 2 levels lower than
your advanced alchemy level, and the combination elixir is
an alchemical item two levels higher than the higher of the
two elixirs’ levels. When this combination elixir is consumed,
both the constituent elixirs take effect. For example, you can
combine two elixirs of life to create a combined elixir that
heals twice the normal amount, or you can combine a lesser
darkvision elixir with a lesser eagle-eye elixir to both gain
darkvision and find secret doors.
DEBILITATING BOMB [free-action] FEAT 6
ADDITIVE 2 ALCHEMIST
Frequency once per round
Trigger You use Quick Alchemy to craft an alchemical
bomb that is at least 2 levels lower than your advanced
alchemy level.
Your bombs impose additional effects on your enemies.
You mix a substance into the bomb that causes one of the
following: dazzled, deafened, flat-footed, or a –5-foot status
penalty to Speeds. If the attack with that bomb hits, the
target must succeed at a Fortitude saving throw or suffer
that effect until the start of your next turn. Use your class
DC for this saving throw (even if someone else throws
the bomb).
DIRECTIONAL BOMBS FEAT 6
ALCHEMIST
You can lob bombs with great force and a precise trajectory to
angle the splash in a cone spraying in a single direction. When
throwing an alchemical bomb with the splash trait, instead of
splashing all squares adjacent to the target, you can treat the
target’s space as the first affected square of a 15-foot cone
directed away from you, potentially allowing you to avoid
allies and splash deeper into enemy lines. If the target takes
up more than a single square, the target’s square closest to
you is the first affected square of the cone.
BOMBER
You can mix an explosive out of just about anything!
ABILITY SCORES
Prioritize Intelligence and Dexterity. Constitution helps
you survive explosions gone wrong, and Wisdom
prevents you from bombing the wrong target.
SKILLS
Acrobatics, Arcana, Crafting, Deception, Intimidation,
Society, Stealth, Thievery
RESEARCH FIELD
Bomber
STARTING FEAT
Quick Bomber
HIGHER-LEVEL FEATS
Smoke Bomb (2nd), Calculated Splash (4th), Directional
Bombs (6th), Sticky Bomb (8th), Expanded Splash (10th),
Mega Bomb (20th)
Core Rulebook
78
8TH LEVEL
FERAL MUTAGEN FEAT 8
ALCHEMIST
Your bestial mutagen brings out the beast lurking within you,
granting you especially sharp claws and teeth as well as a
ferocious appearance. Whenever you’re affected by a bestial
mutagen you created, you gain the mutagen’s item bonus to
your Intimidation checks. In addition, your claws and jaws
are increasingly vicious, and they gain the deadly d10 trait.
Finally, you can increase the mutagen’s penalty to AC from –1
to –2 and, in exchange, increase the damage die size of your
claws and jaws by one step.
POWERFUL ALCHEMY FEAT 8
ALCHEMIST
Alchemical items you create on the fly are particularly potent.
When you use Quick Alchemy to create an infused alchemical
item that allows a saving throw, you can change its DC to your
class DC.
STICKY BOMB [free-action] FEAT 8
ADDITIVE 2 ALCHEMIST
Frequency once per round
Trigger You use Quick Alchemy to craft an alchemical bomb,
and that bomb’s level is at least 2 levels lower than your
advanced alchemy level.
You mix in an additive to make your bomb’s contents adhere
to the target and continue to deal damage. A creature that
takes a direct hit from one of your sticky bombs also takes
persistent damage equal to and of the same type as the
bomb’s splash damage. If the bomb already deals persistent
damage, combine the two amounts.
10TH LEVEL
ELASTIC MUTAGEN FEAT 10
ALCHEMIST
You can cause your body to twist and flow like the quicksilver
within your mutagens. Whenever you are under the effects
of a quicksilver mutagen you created, you can stretch your
legs and Step up to 10 feet, and you can squish and compress
your body, allowing you to make it through tight spaces
as if you were one size smaller, in addition to any effect
from Squeezing.
EXPANDED SPLASH FEAT 10
ALCHEMIST
Prerequisites Calculated Splash
The particularly volatile compounds that you brew into your
bombs result in them creating especially large and powerful
explosions. When you throw an alchemical bomb you
created and that bomb has the splash trait, you can add your
Intelligence modifier to the bomb’s usual splash damage, and
it deals splash damage to every creature within 10 feet of
the target.
GREATER DEBILITATING BOMB FEAT 10
ALCHEMIST
Prerequisites Debilitating Bomb
You have learned enhanced techniques and alchemical
secrets that allow you to expand the range of effects you
can impose with your bombs. When you use Debilitating
Bomb, add the following to the list you can choose from:
clumsy 1, enfeebled 1, stupefied 1, or –10-foot status penalty
to Speeds.
MERCIFUL ELIXIR [free-action] FEAT 10
ADDITIVE 2 ALCHEMIST
Frequency once per round
Trigger You craft an elixir of life using Quick Alchemy, and
that elixir is at least 2 levels lower than your advanced
alchemy level.
You mix a special additive into your elixir that calms the
drinker’s body and mind. The elixir of life attempts to
counteract one fear effect or one effect imposing the paralyzed
condition on the drinker.
POTENT POISONER FEAT 10
ALCHEMIST
Prerequisites Powerful Alchemy
By concentrating your poisons’ toxic components, you
make them harder for victims to resist. When you craft an
alchemical item with the poison trait by any means, the DC is
increased by up to 4, to a maximum of your class DC.
12TH LEVEL
EXTEND ELIXIR FEAT 12
ALCHEMIST
Integrating your own personal energy into the elixirs you
create causes them to affect you for longer. When you
consume one of your alchemical items that has the elixir and
infused traits and a duration of 1 minute or longer, that elixir’s
duration is doubled.
INVINCIBLE MUTAGEN FEAT 12
ALCHEMIST
The fortifying additives you brew into your mutagens make
your juggernaut form impervious. Whenever you’re affected
by a juggernaut mutagen you created, you gain resistance
to all physical damage equal to your Intelligence modifier
(minimum 0).
UNCANNY BOMBS FEAT 12
ALCHEMIST
Prerequisites Far Lobber
You lob bombs unerringly, despite obstructions or distance.
When you throw an alchemical item with the bomb trait,
its range increment increases to 60 feet, you reduce any
circumstance bonus to the target’s AC from cover by 1, and
you automatically succeed at the flat check when targeting a
concealed creature.
79
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SAMPLE ALCHEMIST 14TH LEVEL
GLIB MUTAGEN FEAT 14
ALCHEMIST
Your silvertongue mutagen transcends languages and
plausibility. When affected by a silvertongue mutagen
you have created, you ignore circumstance penalties to
Deception, Diplomacy, Intimidation, and Performance
checks. In addition, your words transcend linguistic barriers;
everyone listening to you speak hears your words as if you
were speaking in their own language (though you do not
actually speak that language, nor does this ability allow you
to understand any additional languages).
GREATER MERCIFUL ELIXIR FEAT 14
ALCHEMIST
Prerequisites Merciful Elixir
Your additives contain panaceas that can remedy a plethora
of maladies. When you use Merciful Elixir, your elixir
can instead attempt to counteract the blinded, deafened,
sickened, or slowed condition.
TRUE DEBILITATING BOMB FEAT 14
ALCHEMIST
Prerequisites Greater Debilitating Bomb
Ever inventive, you have discovered increasingly devastating
ways for your bombs to impede and hamper your foes. When
you use Debilitating Bomb, add the following to the list of
effects you can choose from: enfeebled  2, stupefied 2, or
a –15-foot status penalty to Speeds. If you instead apply
one of the effects listed in Debilitating Bomb, the target
avoids the effect only if the result of its saving throw is a
critical success.
16TH LEVEL
ETERNAL ELIXIR FEAT 16
ALCHEMIST
Prerequisites Extend Elixir
Your body readily accepts and retains minor changes. When
you drink one of your alchemical items that has the elixir and
infused traits and a duration of 1 minute or more, you can
make the elixir’s duration indefinite. You can do so only if the
elixir’s level is half your level or lower. If you later consume
a different elixir and make it indefinite, the effect of the
previous indefinite elixir ends.
EXPLOITIVE BOMB [free-action] FEAT 16
ADDITIVE 2 ALCHEMIST
Frequency once per round
Trigger You craft an alchemical bomb using Quick Alchemy
that’s at least 2 levels lower than your advanced
alchemy level.
You mix a substance into the bomb to foil resistances. The
bomb reduces any resistance the enemy has to its damage
type by an amount equal to your level, but only for that attack.
MUTAGENIST
You transform yourself and others with mutagens.
ABILITY SCORES
Prioritize Intelligence and Strength. Constitution helps
you survive transformations and combat, and Wisdom
helps keep your mind intact despite the warping.
SKILLS
Athletics, Arcana, Crafting, Intimidation, Occultism,
Society, Stealth, Survival
RESEARCH FIELD
Mutagenist
STARTING FEAT
Alchemical Familiar
HIGHER-LEVEL FEATS
Revivifying Mutagen (2nd), Feral Mutagen (8th),
Invincible Mutagen (12th), Persistent Mutagen (16th),
Perfect Mutagen (20th)
Core Rulebook
80
GENIUS MUTAGEN FEAT 16
ALCHEMIST
Specialized tweaks to your formula that supplements your
genius considerably broaden the benefits you gain from
cognitive mutagens. When you’re affected by a cognitive
mutagen you created, you also gain the mutagen’s item bonus
to Deception, Diplomacy, Intimidation, Medicine, Nature,
Performance, Religion, and Survival checks. In addition, you
can communicate telepathically with creatures within 60 feet
with whom you share a language. The communication is twoway once you establish it, so a creature you contact can also
communicate with you.
PERSISTENT MUTAGEN FEAT 16
ALCHEMIST
Prerequisites Extend Elixir
You’ve trained your physical form to remain stable within the
a given altered state. Once per day, when you consume an
alchemical item with the infused and mutagen traits that you
have crafted, you can retain its effects until the next time you
make your daily preparations instead of its normal duration.
18TH LEVEL
IMPROBABLE ELIXIRS FEAT 18
ALCHEMIST
Your mastery of alchemical secrets enables you to replicate
effects most believe can be achieved only via magic. Select
a number of potions equal to your Intelligence modifier
(minimum 1) of 9th level or lower. You gain formulas to
Craft these potions as alchemical items with the elixir
trait. When Crafting these alchemical elixirs, you can
substitute alchemical reagents for an equal value of magical
components, and you can use alchemist’s tools instead of
any other required tool kits. Other than that, the formula
does not change. Once you’ve chosen the potion formulas,
they can’t be changed.
MINDBLANK MUTAGEN FEAT 18
ALCHEMIST
With a minor adjustment of ratios in the formula for your
serene mutagen, you gain mental protections. When you’re
affected by a serene mutagen you created, detection,
revelation, and scrying effects of 9th level or lower detect
nothing from you or your possessions and auras. For instance,
detect magic would still detect other magic in the area, but not
any magic on you.
MIRACLE WORKER FEAT 18
ALCHEMIST
Frequency once every 10 minutes
Your alchemical mastery can resuscitate the recently slain.
You can administer a true elixir of life to a creature who has
been dead for no more than 2 rounds. When you do, that
creature is immediately returned to life with 1 Hit Point and
becomes wounded 1.
PERFECT DEBILITATION FEAT 18
ALCHEMIST
You have perfected the formulas for bombs that impede your
enemies. When you use Debilitating Bomb, your target avoids
the condition the bomb imposes only if it critically succeeds
at its saving throw.
20TH LEVEL
CRAFT PHILOSOPHER’S STONE FEAT 20
ALCHEMIST
Your research has paid off, culminating in the legendary
philosopher’s stone. You learn the formula for the philosopher’s
stone (page 554) and can add it to your formula book.
MEGA BOMB [one-action] FEAT 20
ADDITIVE 3 ALCHEMIST
Prerequisites Expanded Splash
Requirements You are holding an infused alchemical bomb
you crafted, with a level at least 3 lower than your advanced
alchemy level.
You add an incredibly powerful additive to a held bomb to
create a mega bomb, greatly increasing its area and power.
You use an Interact action to throw the mega bomb, rather
than Strike, and you don’t make an attack roll. The mega
bomb affects creatures in a 30-foot-radius burst, centered
within 60 feet of you. The bomb deals damage as if each
creature were the primary target, with a basic Reflex save.
On a failed save, a creature also takes any extra effects that
affect a primary target (such as flat-footed from bottled
lightning). While all targets in the area take splash damage
as primary targets, there is no further splash beyond that
area. If your next action after creating a mega bomb isn’t an
Interact action to throw it, the mega bomb denatures and
loses all effects.
PERFECT MUTAGEN FEAT 20
ALCHEMIST
You have enhanced the formulas for your mutagens, aligning
them perfectly to your physiology. When under the effect of a
mutagen you crafted, you do not suffer its drawback.
SAMPLE FORMULA BOOK
You can choose any 1st-level common alchemical items
for your formula book, but the list below contains a good
selection of starter formulas. A beginner’s book with these
formulas called The Fundamentals of Alchemy has become
popular among mainstream alchemists by staying away
from controversial topics like mutagens, though it has
drawn criticism from fringe alchemists for guiding fledgling
alchemists away from more innovative experiments.
Alchemical Item Formulas: Lesser acid flask, lesser
alchemist’s fire, lesser antidote, lesser antiplague, lesser
cheetah’s elixir, lesser elixir of life, lesser tanglefoot
bag, lesser smokestick.
81
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Core Rulebook
82
During combat encounters...
You summon your rage and rush to the front lines to smash your way through.
Offense is your best defense—you’ll need to drop foes before they can exploit your
relatively low defenses.
During social encounters...
You use intimidation to get what you need, especially when gentler persuasion can’t
get the job done.
While exploring...
You look out for danger, ready to rush headfirst into battle in an instant. You climb
the challenging rock wall and drop a rope for others to follow, and you wade into the
risky currents to reach the hidden switch beneath the water’s surface. If something
needs breaking, you’re up to the task!
In downtime...
You might head to a tavern to carouse, build up the fearsome legend of your mighty
deeds, or recruit followers to become a warlord in your own right.
You Might...
• Have a deep-seated well of anger, hatred, or frustration.
• Prefer a straightforward approach to one requiring patience and tedium.
• Engage in a regimen of intense physical fitness—and punch anyone who says this
conflicts with your distaste for patience and tedium.
Others Probably...
• Rely on your courage and your strength, and trust that you can hold your own in
a fight.
• See you as uncivilized or a boorish lout unfit for high society.
• Believe that you are loyal to your friends and allies and will never relent until the
fight is done.
Rage consumes you in battle. You delight in wreaking havoc and using powerful
weapons to carve through your enemies, relying on astonishing durability without
needing complicated techniques or rigid training. Your rages draw upon a vicious
instinct, which you might associate with an animal, a spirit, or some part of yourself. To many
barbarians, brute force is a hammer and every problem looks like a nail, whereas others try to
hold back the storm of emotions inside them and release their rage only when it matters most.
INITIAL PROFICIENCIES
At 1st level, you gain the
listed proficiency ranks in
the following statistics. You
are untrained in anything
not listed unless you gain a
better proficiency rank in some
other way.
PERCEPTION
Expert in Perception
SAVING THROWS
Expert in Fortitude
Trained in Reflex
Expert in Will
SKILLS
Trained in Athletics
Trained in a number of
additional skills equal to 3 plus
your Intelligence modifier
ATTACKS
Trained in simple weapons
Trained in martial weapons
Trained in unarmed attacks
DEFENSES
Trained in light armor
Trained in medium armor
Trained in unarmored defense
CLASS DC
Trained in barbarian class DC
Barbarian
KEY ABILITY
STRENGTH
At 1st level, your class gives you
an ability boost to Strength.
HIT POINTS
12 plus your Constitution Modifier
You increase your maximum number of
HP by this number at 1st level and every
level thereafter.
CLASSES 3
83
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Class Features
You gain these abilities as a barbarian. Abilities gained at
higher levels list the requisite levels next to their names.
Ancestry and Background
In addition to the abilities provided by your class at
1st level, you have the benefits of your selected ancestry
and background, as described in Chapter 2.
Initial Proficiencies
At 1st level you gain a number of proficiencies that
represent your basic training. These proficiencies are
noted in at the start of this class.
Rage
You gain the Rage action, which lets you fly into a frenzy.
RAGE [one-action]
BARBARIAN CONCENTRATE EMOTION MENTAL
Requirements You aren’t fatigued or raging.
You tap into your inner fury and begin raging. You gain a
number of temporary Hit Points equal to your level plus
your Constitution modifier. This frenzy lasts for 1 minute,
until there are no enemies you can perceive, or until you fall
unconscious, whichever comes first. You can’t voluntarily stop
raging. While you are raging:
• You deal 2 additional damage with melee weapons and
unarmed attacks. This additional damage is halved if
your weapon or unarmed attack is agile.
• You take a –1 penalty to AC.
• You can’t use actions with the concentrate trait unless
they also have the rage trait. You can Seek while raging.
After you stop raging, you lose any remaining temporary
Hit Points from Rage, and you can’t Rage again for 1 minute.
Instinct
Your rage wells up from a dominant instinct—one you
learned from a tradition or that comes naturally to you. Your
instinct gives you an ability, requires you to avoid certain
behaviors, grants you increased damage and resistances
at higher levels, and allows you to select feats tied to your
instinct. For more information, see Instincts on page 86.
Barbarian Feats
At 1st level and every even-numbered level thereafter,
you gain a barbarian class feat. Barbarian class feats are
described beginning on page 88.
Skill Feats 2nd
At 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a skill
feat. Skill feats appear in Chapter 5 and have the skill
trait. You must be trained or better in the corresponding
skill to select a skill feat.
Deny Advantage 3rd
Your foes struggle to pass your defenses. You aren’t flatfooted to hidden, undetected, or flanking creatures of your
level or lower, or creatures of your level or lower using
surprise attack. However, they can still help their allies flank.
General Feats 3rd
At 3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter, you gain a
general feat. General feats are listed in Chapter 5.
Skill Increases 3rd
At 3rd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a skill
increase. You can use this increase either to increase your
proficiency rank to trained in one skill you’re untrained
in, or to increase your proficiency rank in one skill in
which you’re already trained to expert.
At 7th level, you can use skill increases to increase
your proficiency rank to master in a skill in which you’re
already an expert, and at 15th level, you can use them to
increase your proficiency rank to legendary in a skill in
which you’re already a master.
Ability Boosts 5th
At 5th level and every 5 levels thereafter, you boost four
different ability scores. You can use these ability boosts to
increase your ability scores above 18. Boosting an ability
score increases it by 1 if it’s already 18 or above, or by 2 if
it starts below 18.
TABLE 3–2: BARBARIAN ADVANCEMENT
Your
Level Class Features
1 Ancestry and background, initial proficiencies,
rage, instinct, barbarian feat
2 Barbarian feat, skill feat
3 Deny advantage, general feat, skill increase
4 Barbarian feat, skill feat
5 Ability boosts, ancestry feat, brutality, skill increase
6 Barbarian feat, skill feat
7 General feat, juggernaut, skill increase, weapon
specialization
8 Barbarian feat, skill feat
9 Ancestry feat, lightning reflexes, raging resistance,
skill increase
10 Ability boosts, barbarian feat, skill feat
11 General feat, mighty rage, skill increase
12 Barbarian feat, skill feat
13 Ancestry feat, greater juggernaut, medium armor
expertise, skill increase, weapon fury
14 Barbarian feat, skill feat
15 Ability boosts, general feat, greater weapon
specialization, indomitable will, skill increase
16 Barbarian feat, skill feat
17 Ancestry feat, heightened senses, skill increase, quick rage
18 Barbarian feat, skill feat
19 Armor of fury, devastator, general feat, skill increase
20 Ability boosts, barbarian feat, skill feat
Core Rulebook
84
Ancestry Feats 5th
In addition to the ancestry feat you started with, you gain
an ancestry feat at 5th level and every 4 levels thereafter.
The list of ancestry feats available to you can be found in
your ancestry’s entry in Chapter 2.
Brutality 5th
Your fury makes your weapons lethal. Your proficiency
ranks for simple weapons, martial weapons, and unarmed
attacks increase to expert. While raging, you gain access
to the critical specialization effects for melee weapons
and unarmed attacks.
Juggernaut 7th
Your body is accustomed to physical hardship and
resistant to ailments. Your proficiency rank for Fortitude
saves increases to master. When you roll a success on a
Fortitude save, you get a critical success instead.
Weapon Specialization 7th
Your rage helps you hit harder. You deal an
additional 2 damage with weapons and unarmed
attacks in which you have expert proficiency.
This damage increases to 3 if you’re a master, and
4 if you’re legendary. You gain your instinct’s
specialization ability.
Lightning Reflexes 9th
Your reflexes are lightning fast. Your
proficiency rank for Reflex saves increases
to expert.
Raging Resistance 9th
Repeated exposure and toughened skin allow you
to fend off harm. While raging, you gain resistance
equal to 3 + your Constitution modifier to damage
types based on your instinct.
Mighty Rage 11th
Your rage intensifies and lets you burst into action. Your
proficiency rank for your barbarian class DC increases
to expert. You gain the Mighty Rage free action.
MIGHTY RAGE [free-action]
BARBARIAN
Trigger You use the Rage action on your turn.
Use an action that has the rage trait. Alternatively, you can
increase the actions of the triggering Rage to 2 to instead use
a 2-action activity with the rage trait.
Greater Juggernaut 13th
You have a stalwart physiology. Your proficiency rank
for Fortitude saves increases to legendary. When you roll
a critical failure on a Fortitude save, you get a failure
instead. When you fail a Fortitude save against an effect
that deals damage, you halve the damage you take.
Medium Armor Expertise 13th
You’ve learned to defend yourself better against attacks.
Your proficiency ranks for light armor, medium armor,
and unarmored defense increase to expert.
Weapon Fury 13th
Your rage makes you even more effective with the
weapons you wield. Your proficiency ranks for simple
weapons, martial weapons, and unarmed attacks increase
to master.
85
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Greater Weapon Specialization 15th
The weapons you’ve mastered become truly fearsome in
your hands. Your damage from weapon specialization
increases to 4 with weapons and unarmed attacks in
which you’re an expert, 6 if you’re a master, and 8 if
you’re legendary. You gain a greater benefit from your
instinct’s specialization ability.
Indomitable Will 15th
Your rage makes it difficult to control you. Your proficiency
rank for Will saves increases to master. When you roll a
success on a Will save, you get a critical success instead.
Heightened Senses 17th
Your instinct heightens each of your senses further. Your
proficiency rank for Perception increases to master.
Quick Rage 17th
You recover from your Rage quickly, and are soon ready
to begin anew. After you spend a full turn without raging,
you can Rage again without needing to wait 1 minute.
Armor of Fury 19th
Your training and rage deepen your connection to your
armor. Your proficiency ranks for light armor, medium
armor, and unarmored defense increase to master.
Devastator 19th
Your Strikes are so devastating that you hardly care about
resistance, and your barbarian abilities are unparalleled.
Your proficiency rank for your barbarian class DC
increases to master. Your melee Strikes ignore 10 points
of a creature’s resistance to their physical damage.
Instincts
You channel your rage through an instinct. You decide
what your instinct means to you. It could be a creature or
symbol beloved by your clan, or a purely internal source
or filter of your rage, such as a belief, curse, heritage,
or state of mind. Each instinct grants an instinct ability,
plus more abilities you can gain via instinct feats. It also
determines what damage you resist with raging resistance
and, at higher levels, increases the additional damage you
deal when you Rage.
Each instinct lists acts that are anathema to it.
Whenever you perform such acts, you lose the instinct’s
abilities and any instinct feats until you spend 1 day of
downtime re-centering yourself, though you keep all of
your other barbarian abilities.
Animal Instinct
The fury of a wild predator fills you when you Rage,
granting you ferocious unarmed attacks. Cultures that
revere vicious animals (such as apes or bears) give rise
to barbarians with this instinct. You might also be at
war with an uncontrollable, animalistic side of your
personality, or you might be a descendant of a werewolf
or another werecreature. Select an animal from Table 3–3:
Animal Instincts that best matches your chosen animal.
TABLE 3–3: ANIMAL INSTINCTS
Animal Attack Damage Traits
Ape Fist 1d10 B Grapple, unarmed
Bear Jaws 1d10 P Unarmed
Claw 1d6 S Agile, unarmed
Bull Horn 1d10 P Shove, unarmed
Cat Jaws 1d10 P Unarmed
Claw 1d6 S Agile, unarmed
Deer Antler 1d8 P Charge, unarmed
Frog Jaws 1d10 B Unarmed
Tongue 1d4 B Agile, unarmed
Shark Jaws 1d10 P Grapple, unarmed
Snake Fangs 1d10 P Grapple, unarmed
Wolf Jaws 1d10 P Trip, unarmed
Anathema
Flagrantly disrespecting an animal of your chosen kind is
anathema to your instinct, as is using weapons while raging.
Bestial Rage (Instinct Ability)
When you Rage, you gain your chosen animal’s unarmed
attack (or attacks). The specific attack gained, the damage it
deals, and its traits are listed on Table 3–3: Animal Instincts.
These attacks are in the brawling group. Your Rage action
gains the morph, primal, and transmutation traits.
Specialization Ability
Increase the damage die size for the unarmed attacks
granted by your chosen animal by one step, and increase the
additional damage from Rage from 2 to 5 for your chosen
animal’s unarmed attacks. The frog’s tongue attack and
deer’s antler attack gain reach 10 feet. If you have greater
weapon specialization, increase the damage from Rage
from 5 to 12 for your chosen animal’s unarmed attacks.
Raging Resistance
You resist piercing and slashing damage.
Dragon Instinct
You summon the fury of a mighty dragon and manifest
incredible abilities. Perhaps your culture reveres draconic
majesty, or you gained your connection by drinking or
bathing in dragon’s blood or after watching a marauding
wyrm burn your village. Select a type of dragon from Table
3–4: Dragon Instincts to be your instinct’s dragon type.
Chromatic dragons tend to be evil, and metallic dragons
tend to be good.
TABLE 3–4: DRAGON INSTINCTS
Dragon Type Breath Weapon
Black Chromatic Line of acid
Core Rulebook
86
Blue Chromatic Line of electricity
Green Chromatic Cone of poison
Red Chromatic Cone of fire
White Chromatic Cone of cold
Brass Metallic Line of fire
Bronze Metallic Line of electricity
Copper Metallic Line of acid
Gold Metallic Cone of fire
Silver Metallic Cone of cold
Anathema
Letting a personal insult against you slide is anathema to
your instinct. Choose whether your character respects or
abhors your dragon type. If you respect it, defying such a
dragon is anathema, and if you abhor it, failing to defeat
such a dragon you come across is anathema.
Draconic Rage (Instinct Ability)
While raging, you can increase the additional damage
from Rage from 2 to 4 and change its damage type to
match that of your dragon’s breath weapon instead of the
damage type for your weapon or unarmed attack. If you
do this, your Rage action gains the arcane and evocation
traits, as well as the trait matching the damage type.
Specialization Ability
When you use draconic rage, you increase the additional
damage from Rage from 4 to 8. If you have greater
weapon specialization, instead increase the damage from
Rage when using draconic rage from 8 to 16.
Raging Resistance
You resist piercing damage and the damage type of your
dragon’s breath weapon.
Fury Instinct
Your rage comes from a deep and purely personal well
within you. You use your rage as you choose.
Anathema and Instinct Ability
You don’t have an anathema or an instinct ability. Instead,
you gain an additional 1st-level barbarian feat.
Specialization Ability
Increase the additional damage from Rage from 2 to 6. If
you have greater weapon specialization, instead increase
the additional damage from Rage to 12.
Raging Resistance
You resist physical weapon damage, but not physical
damage from other sources (such as unarmed attacks).
Giant Instinct
Your rage gives you the raw power and size of a giant. This
doesn’t necessarily mean you revere giants—you might
scoff at them or even aspire to slay them! You could instead
seem like a giant to other people due to your exceptional
strength or larger-than-life emotions and ego.
Anathema
Failing to face a personal challenge of strength is anathema.
Titan Mauler (Instinct Ability)
You can use a weapon built for a Large creature if you
are Small or Medium (both normally and when raging). If
you’re not Small or Medium, you can use a weapon built
for a creature one size larger than you. You gain access to
one weapon one size larger than you, of any weapon type
otherwise available at character creation. It has the normal
Price and Bulk for a weapon of its size (page 295). When
wielding such a weapon in combat, increase your additional
damage from Rage from 2 to 6, but you have the clumsy
1 condition (page 618) because of the weapon’s unwieldy
size. You can’t remove this clumsy condition or ignore its
penalties by any means while wielding the weapon.
Specialization Ability
Increase the damage from Rage when using a larger weapon
from 6 to 10; if you have greater weapon specialization,
increase it from 10 to 18.
Raging Resistance
You resist bludgeoning damage and your choice of cold,
electricity, or fire, chosen when you gain raging resistance.
Spirit Instinct
Whether you are emotionally sensitive to the spirits around
you; worship ancestors or apparitions; or are haunted by
the specter of an ancestor, relative, friend, or foe, your rage
takes the form of a spiritual possession.
Anathema
Disrespecting corpses or spirits is anathema to your
instinct; defending yourself against undead creatures is not.
Spirit Rage (Instinct Ability)
When you are raging, you can increase your damage from
Rage from 2 to 3 and deal negative or positive damage,
KEY TERMS
You’ll see the following key terms in many barbarian
class features.
Flourish: Flourish actions are techniques that require
too much exertion to perform a large number in a row.
You can use only 1 action with the flourish trait per turn.
Instinct: Instinct abilities require a specific instinct; you
lose access if you perform acts anathema to your instinct.
Open: These maneuvers work only as your first salvo on
your turn. You can use an open action only if you haven’t
used an action with the attack or open trait yet this turn.
Rage: You must be raging to use abilities with the rage
trait, and they end automatically when you stop raging.
87
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
instead of the normal damage type for your weapon or unarmed attack (choose each
time you Rage). If you choose to deal negative or positive damage, your weapon or
unarmed attack gains the effects of the ghost touch property rune, which makes it
more effective against incorporeal creatures, and your Rage action gains the divine
and necromancy traits, plus negative or positive, as appropriate.
Specialization Ability
When using spirit rage, increase the damage from Rage from 3 to 7. If you have greater
weapon specialization, instead increase the damage when using spirit rage to 13.
Raging Resistance
You resist negative damage, as well as damage dealt by the attacks and abilities of
undead creatures, regardless of the damage type.
Barbarian Feats
At every level that you gain a barbarian feat, you can select one of the following
feats. You must satisfy any prerequisites before selecting the feat.
1ST LEVEL
ACUTE VISION FEAT 1
BARBARIAN
When you are raging, your visual senses improve, granting you darkvision.
MOMENT OF CLARITY [one-action] FEAT 1
BARBARIAN CONCENTRATE RAGE
You push back your rage for a moment in order to think clearly. Until the end of this turn, you
can use actions with the concentrate trait even if those actions don’t have the rage trait.
RAGING INTIMIDATION FEAT 1
BARBARIAN
Your fury fills your foes with fear. While you are raging, your Demoralize and Scare to Death
actions (from the Intimidation skill and an Intimidation skill feat, respectively) gain the rage
trait, allowing you to use them while raging. As soon as you meet the prerequisites for the
skill feats Intimidating Glare and Scare to Death, you gain these feats.
RAGING THROWER FEAT 1
BARBARIAN
Thrown weapons become especially deadly in your fury. You apply the additional damage
from Rage to your thrown weapon attacks. If you have the Brutal Critical feat or the
devastator class feature, apply their benefits to thrown weapon attacks.
SUDDEN CHARGE t[two-actions] FEAT 1
BARBARIAN FLOURISH OPEN
With a quick sprint, you dash up to your foe and swing. Stride twice. If you end your
movement within melee reach of at least one enemy, you can make a melee Strike against
that enemy. You can use Sudden Charge while Burrowing, Climbing, Flying, or Swimming
instead of Striding if you have the corresponding movement type.
2ND LEVEL
ACUTE SCENT FEAT 2
BARBARIAN
Prerequisites Acute Vision or darkvision
When you Rage, your sense of smell improves. You gain imprecise scent with a range of 30 feet.
BARBARIAN FEATS
If you need to look up a
barbarian feat by name instead
of by level, use this table.
Feat Level
Acute Scent 2
Acute Vision 1
Animal Rage 8
Animal Skin 6
Attack of Opportunity 6
Awesome Blow 14
Brutal Bully 6
Brutal Critical 18
Cleave 6
Collateral Thrash 16
Come and Get Me 10
Contagious Rage 20
Dragon’s Rage Breath 6
Dragon’s Rage Wings 12
Dragon Transformation 16
Fast Movement 4
Furious Bully 8
Furious Finish 2
Furious Grab 12
Furious Sprint 10
Giant’s Lunge 14
Giant’s Stature 6
Great Cleave 10
Knockback 10
Moment of Clarity 1
No Escape 2
Perfect Clarity 18
Predator’s Pounce 12
Quaking Stomp 20
Raging Athlete 4
Raging Intimidation 1
Raging Thrower 1
Reckless Abandon 16
Renewed Vigor 8
Second Wind 2
Shake It Off 2
Share Rage 8
Spirits’ Interference 6
Spirit’s Wrath 12
Sudden Charge 1
Sudden Leap 8
Swipe 4
Terrifying Howl 10
Thrash 8
Titan’s Stature 12
Vengeful Strike 14
Vicious Evisceration 18
Whirlwind Strike 14
Wounded Rage 4
Core Rulebook
88
FURIOUS FINISH [one-action] FEAT 2
BARBARIAN RAGE
Desperate to finish the fight, you pour all your rage into one final
blow. Make a Strike. If it hits, you gain a circumstance bonus to
damage equal to the number of rounds remaining in your Rage
(maximum 10). After this Strike, your Rage immediately ends,
and you are fatigued until you rest for at least 10 minutes.
NO ESCAPE [reaction] FEAT 2
BARBARIAN RAGE
Trigger A foe within reach attempts to move away from you.
You keep pace with a retreating foe. Stride up to your Speed,
following the foe and keeping it in reach throughout its
movement until it stops moving or you’ve moved your full
Speed. You can use No Escape to Burrow, Climb, Fly, or Swim
instead of Stride if you have the corresponding movement type.
SECOND WIND FEAT 2
BARBARIAN
You can enter a second rage, but afterward you need to catch
your breath. You can Rage without waiting for 1 minute after the
previous Rage (or 1 round, with quick rage), but when you end
this second Rage, you’re fatigued until you rest for 10 minutes.
SHAKE IT OFF [one-action] FEAT 2
BARBARIAN CONCENTRATE RAGE
You concentrate on your rage, overcoming fear and fighting
back sickness. Reduce your frightened condition value by 1,
and attempt a Fortitude save to recover from the sickened
condition as if you had spent an action retching; you reduce
your sickened condition value by 1 on a failure (but not on a
critical failure), by 2 on a success, or by 3 on a critical success.
4TH LEVEL
FAST MOVEMENT FEAT 4
BARBARIAN
Your rage is a frenzy of rapid movements. While you are
raging, you gain a +10-foot status bonus to your Speed.
RAGING ATHLETE FEAT 4
BARBARIAN
Prerequisites expert in Athletics
Physical obstacles can’t hold back your fury. While you are
raging, you gain a climb Speed and swim Speed equal to your
land Speed, the DC of High Jumps and Long Jumps decreases
by 10, and your Leap distance increases by 5 feet when you
jump horizontally and by 2 feet when you jump vertically.
SWIPE [two-acin][two-actions] FEAT 4
BARBARIAN FLOURISH
You make a wide, arcing swing. Make a single melee Strike and
compare the attack roll result to the ACs of up to two foes, each of
whom must be within your melee reach and adjacent to the other.
89
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SAMPLE BARBARIAN Roll damage only once and apply it to each creature you hit. A
Swipe counts as two attacks for your multiple attack penalty.
If you’re using a weapon with the sweep trait, its modifier
applies to all your Swipe attacks.
WOUNDED RAGE [reaction] FEAT 4
BARBARIAN RAGE
Trigger You take damage and are capable of entering a rage.
You roar in pain, awakening the rage within you. You Rage.
6TH LEVEL
ANIMAL SKIN FEAT 6
BARBARIAN INSTINCT MORPH PRIMAL TRANSMUTATION
Prerequisites animal instinct
Your proficiency in unarmored defense increases to expert.
While you are raging and unarmored, your skin transforms
into a thick hide resembling your animal’s skin. You gain a
+1 status bonus to AC instead of taking a –1 penalty to AC;
if you have the greater juggernaut class feature, this status
bonus increases to +2. The thickness of your hide gives you a
Dexterity modifier cap to your AC of +3.
ATTACK OF OPPORTUNITY [reaction] FEAT 6
BARBARIAN
Trigger A creature within your reach uses a manipulate action
or a move action, makes a ranged attack, or leaves a square
during a move action it’s using.
You swat a foe that leaves an opening. Make a melee Strike
against the triggering creature. If your attack is a critical hit and
the trigger was a manipulate action, you disrupt that action.
This Strike doesn’t count toward your multiple attack penalty,
and your multiple attack penalty doesn’t apply to this Strike.
BRUTAL BULLY FEAT 6
BARBARIAN
Prerequisites expert in Athletics
You push your foes around and leave bruises. While raging, when
you successfully Disarm, Grapple, Shove, or Trip a foe, you deal
that foe bludgeoning damage equal to your Strength modifier;
add this to the damage from a critical success to Trip.
CLEAVE [reaction] FEAT 6
BARBARIAN RAGE
Trigger Your melee Strike kills a creature or knocks it
unconscious, and another foe is adjacent to that creature.
You swing clear through one foe and into another. Make a
melee Strike against the second foe.
DRAGON’S RAGE BREATH [two-acin][two-actions] FEAT 6
ARCANE BARBARIAN CONCENTRATE EVOCATION INSTINCT RAGE
Prerequisites dragon instinct
Requirements You haven’t used this ability since you last Raged.
You breathe deeply and exhale powerful energy in a 30-foot
cone or 60-foot line, dealing 1d6 damage per level. The area
and damage type match those of your dragon (see Table 3–4
ANIMAL RAGER
The animal within you breaks free, turning you
into a feral creature of nature when you rage. You
follow your instincts rather than reason, and you
find yourself at home in the wilderness.
ABILITY SCORES
Increase your Strength as high as you can, followed by
your Constitution and Dexterity. A high Wisdom can
improve your senses.
SKILLS
Athletics, Intimidation, Nature, Survival
INSTINCT
Animal instinct
STARTING FEAT
Raging Intimidation
HIGHER-LEVEL FEATS
No Escape (2nd), Animal Skin (6th), Animal Rage (8th),
Terrifying Howl (10th), Predator’s Pounce (12th)
Core Rulebook
90
on page 86). If you used this ability in the last hour, the area
and the damage are halved (15-foot cone or 30-foot line; 1d6
damage for every 2 levels). Each creature in the area must
attempt a basic Reflex save.
GIANT’S STATURE [one-action] FEAT 6
BARBARIAN INSTINCT POLYMORPH PRIMAL RAGE TRANSMUTATION
Prerequisites giant instinct
Requirements You are Medium or smaller.
You grow to incredible size. You become Large, increasing your
reach by 5 feet and gaining the clumsy 1 condition (page 618)
until you stop raging. Your equipment grows with you.
SPIRITS’ INTERFERENCE [one-action] FEAT 6
BARBARIAN DIVINE INSTINCT NECROMANCY RAGE
Prerequisites spirit instinct
You call forth protective spirits to ward off ranged attacks. Until
your rage ends, anyone making a ranged attack against you must
succeed at a DC 5 flat check or the attack misses with no effect.
8TH LEVEL
ANIMAL RAGE [one-action] FEAT 8
BARBARIAN CONCENTRATE INSTINCT POLYMORPH PRIMAL RAGE TRANSMUTATION
Prerequisites animal instinct
You transform into your animal. You gain the effects of the
3rd-level animal form spell except you use your own statistics,
temporary Hit Points, and unarmed attacks instead of those
granted by animal form. You also retain the constant abilities of
your gear. If your animal is a frog, your tongue’s reach increases
to 15 feet. Dismissing the transformation gains the rage trait.
FURIOUS BULLY FEAT 8
BARBARIAN
Prerequisites master in Athletics
You bully foes across the battlefield. While raging, you gain a
+2 circumstance bonus to Athletics checks for attack actions.
RENEWED VIGOR [one-action] FEAT 8
BARBARIAN CONCENTRATE RAGE
You pause to recover your raging vigor. You gain temporary Hit
Points equal to half your level plus your Constitution modifier.
SHARE RAGE [one-action] FEAT 8
AUDITORY BARBARIAN RAGE VISUAL
Requirements You haven’t used this ability since you last Raged.
You stoke an ally’s fury. While you are raging, one willing
creature within 30 feet gains the effects of the Rage action,
except it can still use concentrate actions.
SUDDEN LEAP FEAT 8
BARBARIAN
You swing at a foe while mid-leap. Make a Leap, High Jump, or
Long Jump and attempt one melee Strike at any point during your
jump. Immediately after the Strike, you fall to the ground if you’re
in the air, even if you haven’t reached the maximum distance of
your jump. If the distance you fall is no more than the height of
your jump, you take no damage and land upright.
When attempting a High Jump or Long Jump during a
Sudden Leap, determine the DC using the Long Jump DCs, and
increase your maximum distance to double your Speed.
THRASH [one-action] FEAT 8
BARBARIAN RAGE
Requirements You have a foe grabbed.
You thrash the grabbed foe around. It takes bludgeoning
damage equal to your Strength modifier plus your ferocious
specialization damage plus your Rage damage. The foe must
attempt a basic Fortitude save against your class DC.
10TH LEVEL
COME AND GET ME [one-action] FEAT 10
BARBARIAN CONCENTRATE RAGE
You open yourself to attacks so you can respond in turn. Until
your rage ends, you are flat-footed, and damage rolls against you
gain a +2 circumstance bonus. If a creature hits you, that creature
is flat-footed to you until the end of your next turn. If you hit it
before the end of your next turn, you gain temporary Hit Points
equal to your Constitution modifier, or double that on a critical hit.
These temporary Hit Points last until the end of your rage.
FURIOUS SPRINT [two-acin][two-actions] FEAT 10
BARBARIAN RAGE
You rush forward. Stride up to five times your Speed in a straight
line. You can increase the number of actions this activity takes to
3 to Stride up to eight times your Speed in a straight line instead.
GREAT CLEAVE FEAT 10
BARBARIAN RAGE
Prerequisites Cleave
Your fury carries your weapon through multiple foes. When you
Cleave, if your Strike also kills or knocks the target unconscious,
you can continue to make melee Strikes until you make a Strike
that doesn’t kill or knock a creature unconscious, or until there
are no creatures adjacent to the most recent creature you
attacked while Cleaving, whichever comes first.
KNOCKBACK [one-action] FEAT 10
BARBARIAN RAGE
Requirements Your last action was a successful Strike.
The weight of your swing drives your enemy back. You push
the foe back 5 feet, with the effects of a successful Shove. You
can follow the foe as normal for a successful Shove.
TERRIFYING HOWL [one-action] FEAT 10
AUDITORY BARBARIAN RAGE
Prerequisites Intimidating Glare
You unleash a terrifying howl. Attempt Intimidate checks to
Demoralize each creature within 30 feet. Regardless of the
results of your checks, each creature is then temporarily
immune to Terrifying Howl for 1 minute.
91
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
FURY
You keep things simple, because you need only one
thing to drive you: your own inner rage.
ABILITY SCORES
Prioritize your Strength, then your Constitution and
Dexterity. Wisdom can make you more perceptive.
SKILLS
Acrobatics, Athletics, Intimidation, Stealth
INSTINCT
Fury instinct
STARTING FEAT
Sudden Charge
HIGHER-LEVEL FEATS
Furious Finish (2nd), Fast Movement (4th), Attack of
Opportunity (6th), Whirlwind Strike (14th)
SAMPLE BARBARIAN 12TH LEVEL
DRAGON’S RAGE WINGS [one-action] FEAT 12
BARBARIAN INSTINCT MORPH PRIMAL RAGE TRANSMUTATION
Prerequisites dragon instinct
You sprout dragon wings from your back of the same color
as your chosen dragon. While you are raging, you gain a
fly Speed equal to your land Speed. If you are flying when
your rage ends, you start to fall but the transformation only
completes at the last moment, so you take no damage from
the fall and land standing up.
FURIOUS GRAB [one-action] FEAT 12
BARBARIAN RAGE
Requirements Your last action was a successful Strike, and either
you have a hand free or your Strike used a grapple weapon.
You grab your foe while it’s distracted by your attack. The
foe you hit becomes grabbed, as if you had succeeded at an
Athletics check to Grapple the foe.
PREDATOR’S POUNCE [one-action] FEAT 12
BARBARIAN FLOURISH INSTINCT OPEN RAGE
Prerequisites animal instinct
Requirements You are unarmored or wearing light armor.
You close the distance to your prey in a blur, pouncing on the
creature before it can react. You Stride up to your Speed and
make a Strike at the end of your movement.
SPIRIT’S WRATH [one-action] FEAT 12
ATTACK BARBARIAN CONCENTRATE INSTINCT RAGE
Prerequisites spirit instinct
You call forth an ephemeral apparition, typically the ghost
of an ancestor or a nature spirit, which takes the form of a
wisp. The spirit wisp makes a melee wisp rush unarmed
attack against an enemy within 120 feet of you. The wisp’s
attack modifier is equal to your proficiency bonus for martial
weapons plus your Strength modifier plus a +2 item bonus,
and it applies the same circumstance and status bonuses
and penalties that you have. On a hit, the wisp deals damage
equal to 4d8 plus your Constitution modifier. The damage is
your choice of negative or positive damage; don’t apply your
Rage damage or your weapon specialization damage, but
circumstance and status bonuses and penalties that would
also affect the wisp’s damage apply. If your wisp’s Strike is a
critical hit, the target becomes frightened 1. This attack uses
and counts toward your multiple attack penalty as if you were
the one attacking.
TITAN’S STATURE FEAT 12
BARBARIAN INSTINCT POLYMORPH TRANSMUTATION
Prerequisites giant instinct, Giant’s Stature
You grow to even greater size. When using Giant’s Stature,
you can instead become Huge (increasing your reach by 10
feet if you were Medium or smaller) while you are raging.
You have the clumsy 1 condition (page 618) as long as you
are Huge.
Core Rulebook
92
14TH LEVEL
AWESOME BLOW FEAT 14
BARBARIAN CONCENTRATE RAGE
Prerequisites Knockback
Your attacks are so powerful, they can flatten your opponents.
When you use Knockback, you can attempt an Athletics check
against your target’s Fortitude DC.
Critical Success You gain the critical success effect of a Shove,
then the critical success effect of a Trip against the target.
Success You gain the success effect of a Shove, then the
success effect of a Trip against the target.
Failure You gain the normal effect of Knockback.
GIANT’S LUNGE [one-action] FEAT 14
BARBARIAN CONCENTRATE INSTINCT RAGE
Prerequisites giant instinct
You extend your body and prepare to attack foes outside your
normal reach. Until your rage ends, all your melee weapons
and unarmed attacks gain reach 10. This doesn’t increase the
reach of any weapon or unarmed attack that already has the
reach trait, but it does combine with abilities that increase
your reach due to increased size, such as Giant’s Stature.
VENGEFUL STRIKE [reaction] FEAT 14
BARBARIAN RAGE
Prerequisites Come and Get Me
Trigger A creature within your reach succeeds or critically
succeeds at an attack against you.
Requirements You’re under the effect of Come and Get Me.
When struck by an enemy, you respond in turn. Make a melee
Strike against the triggering creature. This Strike doesn’t
count toward your multiple attack penalty, and your multiple
attack penalty doesn’t apply to this Strike.
WHIRLWIND STRIKE [thre-acion][three-actions] FEAT 14
BARBARIAN FLOURISH OPEN
You attack all nearby adversaries. Make a melee Strike against
each enemy within your melee reach. Each attack counts
toward your multiple attack penalty, but do not increase your
penalty until you have made all your attacks.
16TH LEVEL
COLLATERAL THRASH FEAT 16
BARBARIAN RAGE
Prerequisites Thrash
When you Thrash a grabbed foe, you smack that foe into another
nearby. Another foe adjacent to the grabbed foe also takes your
Thrash damage, with a basic Reflex save against your class DC.
DRAGON TRANSFORMATION [one-action] FEAT 16
BARBARIAN CONCENTRATE INSTINCT POLYMORPH PRIMAL RAGE TRANSMUTATION
Prerequisites dragon instinct, Dragon’s Rage Wings
You transform into a ferocious Large dragon, gaining the effects
of 6th-level dragon form except that you use your own AC and
attack modifier; you also apply your extra damage from Rage.
The action to Dismiss the transformation gains the rage trait.
At 18th level, you gain a +20-foot status bonus to your fly
Speed, your damage bonus with dragon Strikes increases to
+12, your breath weapon DC increases to 30, and you gain a
+14 status bonus to your breath weapon damage.
RECKLESS ABANDON [free-action] FEAT 16
BARBARIAN RAGE
Trigger Your turn begins, and you are at half or fewer Hit Points.
Your blood boils when you take a beating, and you throw caution
to the wind to finish the fight. You gain a +2 circumstance
bonus to attack rolls, a –2 penalty to AC, and a –1 penalty to
saves. These bonuses and penalties last until your Rage ends
or until you are above half Hit Points, whichever comes first.
18TH LEVEL
BRUTAL CRITICAL FEAT 18
BARBARIAN
Your critical hits are particularly devastating. On a critical hit,
add one extra damage die. This is in addition to any extra dice
you gain if the weapon is deadly or fatal. The target also takes
persistent bleed damage equal to two damage dice.
PERFECT CLARITY [reaction] FEAT 18
BARBARIAN CONCENTRATE FORTUNE RAGE
Trigger You fail or critically fail an attack roll or Will save.
You burn out all of your rage to ensure that your attack lands
and your mind remains free. Reroll the triggering attack roll or
Will save with a +2 circumstance bonus, use the better result,
and resolve the effect. You then immediately stop raging.
VICIOUS EVISCERATION [two-acin][two-actions] FEAT 18
BARBARIAN RAGE
You make a vicious attack that maims your enemy. Make a
melee Strike. If the Strike hits and deals damage, the target is
drained 1, or drained 2 on a critical success.
20TH LEVEL
CONTAGIOUS RAGE FEAT 20
AUDITORY BARBARIAN RAGE VISUAL
Prerequisites Share Rage
You can drive your allies into a frenzy, granting them incredible
benefits. You can ignore the requirements on Share Rage,
using it multiple times in a Rage. Allies affected by Share Rage
who accept your anathema for the duration of the Rage gain
your instinct ability and the specialization ability it gains from
weapon specialization, but not greater weapon specialization.
QUAKING STOMP [one-action] FEAT 20
BARBARIAN MANIPULATE RAGE
Frequency once per 10 minutes
You stomp the ground with such force that it creates a minor
earthquake, with the effects of the earthquake spell.
93
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Core Rulebook
94
During combat encounters...
You use magical performances to alter the odds in favor of your allies. You confidently
alternate between attacks, healing, and helpful spells as needed.
During social encounters...
You persuade, prevaricate, and threaten with ease.
While exploring...
You’re a font of knowledge, folktales, legends, and lore that provide a deeper context
and helpful reconnaissance for the group’s adventure. Your spells and performances
inspire your allies to greater discovery and success.
In downtime...
You can earn money and prestige with your performances, gaining a name for
yourself and acquiring patrons. Eventually, tales of your talents and triumphs might
attract other bards to study your techniques in a bardic college.
You Might...
• Have a passion for your art so strong that you forge a spiritual connection with it.
• Take point when tact and nonviolent solutions are required.
• Follow your muse, whether it’s a mysterious fey creature, a philosophical
concept, a psychic force, or a deity of art or music, and with its aid learn secret
lore that few others have.
Others Probably...
• Relish the opportunity to invite you to social events, either as a performer or a
guest, but consider you to be something of a curiosity in their social circles.
• Underestimate you compared to other spellcasters, believing you are little more
than a foppish minstrel and overlooking the subtle power of your magic.
• Respond favorably to your social charm and abilities, but remain suspicious of
your beguiling magic.
You are a master of artistry, a scholar of hidden secrets, and a captivating
persuader. Using powerful performances, you influence minds and elevate
souls to new levels of heroics. You might use your powers to become a
charismatic leader, or perhaps you might instead be a counselor, manipulator, scholar,
scoundrel, or virtuoso. While your versatility leads some to consider you a beguiling ne’erdo-well and a jack-of-all-trades, it’s dangerous to dismiss you as a master of none.
INITIAL PROFICIENCIES
At 1st level, you gain the
listed proficiency ranks in
the following statistics. You
are untrained in anything
not listed unless you gain a
better proficiency rank in some
other way.
PERCEPTION
Expert in Perception
SAVING THROWS
Trained in Fortitude
Trained in Reflex
Expert in Will
SKILLS
Trained in Occultism
Trained in Performance
Trained in a number of
additional skills equal to 4 plus
your Intelligence modifier
ATTACKS
Trained in simple weapons
Trained in the longsword, rapier,
sap, shortbow, shortsword, and
whip
Trained in unarmed attacks
DEFENSES
Trained in light armor
Trained in unarmored defense
SPELLS
Trained in occult spell attacks
Trained in occult spell DCs
Bard
HIT POINTS
8 plus your Constitution modifier
You increase your maximum number of
HP by this number at 1st level and every
level thereafter.
KEY ABILITY
CHARISMA
At 1st level, your class gives you
an ability boost to Charisma.
CLASSES 3
95
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Class Features
You gain these abilities as a bard. Abilities gained at higher
levels list the requisite levels next to the features’ names.
Ancestry and Background
In addition to the abilities provided by your class at 1st
level, you have the benefits of your selected ancestry and
background, as described in Chapter 2.
Initial Proficiencies
At 1st level you gain a number of proficiencies, representing
your basic training. These are noted at the start of this class.
Occult Spellcasting
You draw upon magic from esoteric knowledge. You can
cast occult spells using the Cast a Spell activity, and you
can supply material, somatic, and verbal components when
casting spells (see Casting Spells on page 302). Because
you’re a bard, you can usually play an instrument for
spells requiring somatic or material components, as long
as it takes at least one of your hands to do so. If you use
an instrument, you don’t need a spell component pouch or
another hand free. You can usually also play an instrument
for spells requiring verbal components, instead of speaking.
Each day, you can cast up to two 1st-level spells. You
must know spells to cast them, and you learn them via the
spell repertoire class feature. The number of spells you can
cast each day is called your spell slots.
As you increase in level as a bard, your number of spells
per day increases, as does the highest level of spells you can
cast, as shown on Table 3–6: Bard Spells per Day on page 98.
Some of your spells require you to attempt a spell attack
roll to see how effective they are, or have your enemies
roll against your spell DC (typically by attempting a saving
throw). Since your key ability is Charisma, your spell
attack rolls and spell DCs use your Charisma modifier.
Details on calculating these statistics appear on page 447.
Heightening Spells
When you get spell slots of 2nd level and higher, you can fill
those slots with stronger versions of lower-level spells. This
increases the spell’s level to match the spell slot. You must
have a spell in your spell repertoire at the level you want to
cast in order to heighten it to that level. Many spells have
specific improvements when they are heightened to certain
levels (page 299). The signature spells class feature lets you
heighten certain spells freely.
Cantrips
Some of your spells are cantrips. A cantrip is a special type
of spell that doesn’t use spell slots. You can cast a cantrip at
will, any number of times per day. A cantrip is automatically
heightened to half your level rounded up, which equals the
highest level of spell you can cast as a bard. For example, as
a 1st-level bard, your cantrips are 1st-level spells, and as a
5th-level bard, your cantrips are 3rd-level spells.
Spell Repertoire
The collection of spells you can cast is called your spell
repertoire. At 1st level, you learn two 1st-level occult spells
of your choice and five occult cantrips of your choice. You
choose these from the common spells from the occult list
(page 311) or from other occult spells to which you have
access. You can cast any spell in your spell repertoire by
using a spell slot of an appropriate spell level.
You add to this spell repertoire as you increase in level.
Each time you get a spell slot (see Table 3–6), you add a
spell to your spell repertoire of the same level. At 2nd level,
you select another 1st-level spell; at 3rd level, you select
two 2nd-level spells, and so on. When you add spells, you
might add a higher-level version of a spell you already
have, so you can cast a heightened version of that spell.
Though you gain them at the same rate, your spell slots
and the spells in your spell repertoire are separate. If a
feat or other ability adds a spell to your spell repertoire,
it wouldn’t give you another spell slot, and vice versa.
TABLE 3–5: BARD ADVANCEMENT
Your
Level Class Features
1 Ancestry and background, initial proficiencies,
occult spellcasting, spell repertoire, composition
spells, muse
2 Bard feat, skill feat
3 2nd-level spells, general feat, lightning reflexes,
signature spells, skill increase
4 Bard feat, skill feat
5 3rd-level spells, ability boosts, ancestry feat,
skill increase
6 Bard feat, skill feat
7 4th-level spells, expert spellcaster, general feat,
skill increase
8 Bard feat, skill feat
9 5th-level spells, ancestry feat, great fortitude,
resolve, skill increase
10 Ability boots, bard feat, skill feat
11 6th-level spells, bard weapon expertise, general feat,
skill increase, vigilant senses
12 Bard feat, skill feat
13 7th-level spells, ancestry feat, light armor expertise,
skill increase, weapon specialization
14 Bard feat, skill feat
15 8th-level spells, ability boosts, general feat, master
spellcaster, skill increase
16 Bard feat, skill feat
17 9th-level spells, ancestry feat, greater resolve,
skill increase
18 Bard feat, skill feat
19 General feat, legendary spellcaster, magnum opus,
skill increase
20 Ability boosts, bard feat, skill feat
Core Rulebook
96
Swapping Spells in Your Repertoire
As you gain new spells in your repertoire, you might
want to replace some of the spells you previously learned.
Each time you gain a level and learn new spells, you can
swap out one of your old spells for a different spell of the
same level. This spell can be a cantrip. You can also swap
out spells by retraining during downtime (page 481).
Composition Spells
You can infuse your performances with magic to create
unique effects called compositions. Compositions are
a special type of spell that often require you to use the
Performance skill when casting them. Composition spells
are a type of focus spell. It costs 1 Focus Point to cast a focus
spell, and you start with a focus pool of 1 Focus Point. You
refill your focus pool during your daily preparations, and
you can regain 1 Focus Point by spending 10 minutes using
the Refocus activity to perform, write a new composition,
or otherwise engage your muse.
Focus spells are automatically heightened to half your
level rounded up, much like cantrips. Focus spells don’t
require spell slots, and you can’t cast them using spell
slots. Taking feats can give you more focus spells and
increase the size of your focus pool, though your focus
pool can never hold more than 3 Focus Points. The full
rules for focus spells appear on page 300.
You learn the counter performance composition spell
(page 386), protecting against auditory and visual effects.
Composition Cantrips
Composition cantrips are special composition spells that
don’t cost Focus Points, so you can use them as often as you
like. Composition cantrips are in addition to the cantrips
you choose from the occult list. Generally, only feats can
give you more composition cantrips. Unlike other
cantrips, you can’t swap out composition cantrips
gained from bard feats at a later level, unless you
swap out the specific feat via retraining (page 481).
You learn the inspire courage composition
cantrip (page 386), which boosts your allies’
attacks, damage, and defense against fear.
Muses
As a bard, you select one muse at 1st level. This muse leads
you to great things, and might be a physical creature, a
deity, a philosophy, or a captivating mystery.
Enigma
Your muse is a mystery, driving you to uncover the hidden
secrets of the multiverse. If your muse is a creature, it
might be a dragon or otherworldly being; if a deity, it
might be Irori or Nethys. You gain the Bardic Lore feat
and add true strike to your spell repertoire.
Maestro
Your muse is a virtuoso, inspiring you to greater heights.
If it’s a creature, it might be a performance-loving creature
such as a choral angel or lillend azata; if a deity, it might
be Shelyn. As a bard with a maestro muse, you are an
inspiration to your allies and confident of your musical and
oratorical abilities. You gain the Lingering Composition feat
and add soothe to your spell repertoire.
Polymath
Your muse is a jack of all trades, flitting between skills and
pursuits. If it’s is a creature, it might be an eclectic creature
like a fey; if a deity, it might be Desna or Calistria. As a bard
with a polymath muse, you are interested in a wide array of
topics but rarely dedicated to any one, and you rarely make
up your mind—you want to try everything. You gain the
Versatile Performance feat and add unseen servant to your
spell repertoire.
97
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
different spell of that level without swapping any spells;
this takes as much time as retraining a spell normally does.
Skill Increases 3rd
At 3rd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a skill
increase. You can use this increase either to increase your
proficiency rank to trained in one skill you’re untrained
in, or to increase your proficiency rank in one skill in
which you’re already trained to expert.
At 7th level, you can use skill increases to increase
your proficiency rank to master in a skill in which you’re
already an expert, and at 15th level, you can use them to
increase your proficiency rank to legendary in a skill in
which you’re already a master.
Ability Boosts 5th
At 5th level and every 5 levels thereafter, you boost four
different ability scores. You can use these ability boosts to
increase your ability scores above 18. Boosting an ability
score increases it by 1 if it’s already 18 or above, or by 2
if it starts out below 18.
Ancestry Feats 5th
In addition to the ancestry feat you started with, you gain
an ancestry feat at 5th level and every 4 levels thereafter.
The list of feats is in your ancestry’s entry in Chapter 2.
Expert Spellcaster 7th
Your proficiency ranks for occult spell attack rolls and
spell DCs increase to expert.
TABLE 3–6: BARD SPELLS PER DAY
Your Spell Level
Level Cantrips 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th
1 5 2 — — — — — — — — —
2 5 3 — — — — — — — — —
3 5 3 2 — — — — — — — —
4 5 3 3 — — — — — — — —
5 5 3 3 2 — — — — — — —
6 5 3 3 3 — — — — — — —
7 5 3 3 3 2 — — — — — —
8 5 3 3 3 3 — — — — — —
9 5 3 3 3 3 2 — — — — —
10 5 3 3 3 3 3 — — — — —
11 5 3 3 3 3 3 2 — — — —
12 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 — — — —
13 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 2 — — —
14 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 — — —
15 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 2 — —
16 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 — —
17 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 2 —
18 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 —
19 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 1*
20 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 1*
* The magnum opus class feature gives you a 10th-level spell slot that works a bit differently from other spell slots.
Bard Feats 2nd
At 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a bard
class feat (page 99).
Skill Feats 2nd
At 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a
skill feat. Skill feats can be found in Chapter 5 and
have the skill trait. You must be trained or better in the
corresponding skill to select a skill feat.
General Feats 3rd
At 3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter, you gain a
general feat. General feats are listed in Chapter 5.
Lightning Reflexes 3rd
Your reflexes are lightning fast. Your proficiency rank in
Reflex saves increases to expert.
Signature Spells 3rd
Experience allows you to cast some spells more flexibly.
For each spell level you have access to, choose one spell of
that level to be a signature spell. You don’t need to learn
heightened versions of signature spells separately; instead,
you can heighten these spells freely. If you’ve learned a
signature spell at a higher level than its minimum, you
can also cast all its lower-level versions without learning
those separately. If you swap out a signature spell, you
can choose a replacement signature spell of the same spell
level at which you learned the previous spell. You can
also retrain specifically to change a signature spell to a
Core Rulebook
98
Great Fortitude 9th
Your physique is incredibly hardy. Your proficiency rank
for Fortitude saves increases to expert.
Resolve 9th
You’ve steeled your mind with resolve. Your proficiency
rank for Will saves increases to master. When you roll a
success at a Will save, you get a critical success instead.
Bard Weapon Expertise 11th
You have become thoroughly adept with bardic weapons.
You gain expert proficiency in simple weapons, plus the
longsword, rapier, sap, shortbow, shortsword, and whip.
When you critically succeed at an attack roll using one
of these weapons while one of your compositions is
active, you apply the critical specialization effect for
that weapon.
Vigilant Senses 11th
Through your adventures, you’ve developed keen
awareness and attention to detail. Your proficiency rank
for Perception increases to master.
Light Armor Expertise 13th
You’ve learned how to dodge while wearing light or
no armor. Your proficiency ranks for light armor and
unarmored defense increase to expert.
Weapon Specialization 13th
You’ve learned how to inflict greater injuries with the
weapons you know best. You deal 2 additional damage
with weapons and unarmed attacks in which you are an
expert. This damage increases to 3 damage if you’re a
master, and 4 damage if you’re legendary.
Master Spellcaster 15th
You’ve mastered the occult. Your proficiency ranks for
occult spell attack rolls and spell DCs increase to master.
Greater Resolve 17th
Your unbelievable training grants you mental resiliency.
Your proficiency rank for Will saves increases to
legendary. When you roll a success at a Will save, you get
a critical success. When you roll a critical failure at a Will
save, you get a failure instead. When you fail a Will save
against a damaging effect, you take half damage.
Magnum Opus 19th
You have tuned your spellcasting to the highest caliber.
Add two common 10th-level occult spells to your
repertoire. You gain a single 10th-level spell slot you can
use to cast one of those two spells using bard spellcasting.
You don’t gain more 10th-level spells as you level up,
unlike other spell slots, and you can’t use 10th-level slots
with abilities that give you more spell slots or that let you
cast spells without expending spell slots.
Legendary Spellcaster 19th
Your command of occult magic is the stuff of legends.
Your proficiency ranks for occult spell attack rolls and
spell DCs increase to legendary.
Bard Feats
At every level that you gain a bard feat, you can select one
of the following feats. You must satisfy any prerequisites
before selecting the feat.
1ST LEVEL
BARDIC LORE FEAT 1
BARD
Prerequisites enigma muse
Your studies make you informed on every subject. You
are trained in Bardic Lore, a special Lore skill that can be
used only to Recall Knowledge, but on any topic. If you
have legendary proficiency in Occultism, you gain expert
proficiency in Bardic Lore, but you can’t increase your
proficiency rank in Bardic Lore by any other means.
LINGERING COMPOSITION FEAT 1
BARD
Prerequisites maestro muse, focus pool
By adding a flourish, you make your compositions last longer.
You learn the lingering composition focus spell (page 387).
Increase the number of Focus Points in your focus pool by 1.
REACH SPELL [one-action] FEAT 1
BARD CONCENTRATE METAMAGIC
You can extend your spells’ range. If the next action you use is
to Cast a Spell that has a range, increase that spell’s range by
KEY TERMS
You’ll see the following key terms in many bard class features.
Composition: To cast a composition cantrip or focus
spell, you use a type of Performance (page 250). If the spell
includes a verbal component, you must use an auditory
performance, and if it includes a somatic component, you
must use a visual one. The spell gains all the traits of the
performance you used. You can cast only one composition
spell each turn, and you can have only one active at a time.
If you cast a new composition spell, any ongoing effects
from your previous composition spell end immediately.
Metamagic: Actions with the metamagic trait tweak
the properties of your spells. These actions usually come
from metamagic feats. You must use a metamagic action
directly before Casting the Spell you want to alter. If you
use any action (including free actions and reactions) other
than Cast a Spell directly after, you waste the benefits of
the metamagic action. Any additional effects added by a
metamagic action are part of the spell’s effect, not of the
metamagic action itself.
99
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
30 feet. As is standard for increasing spell ranges, if the spell normally has a range of touch,
you extend its range to 30 feet.
VERSATILE PERFORMANCE FEAT 1
BARD
Prerequisites polymath muse
You can rely on the grandeur of your performances rather than ordinary social skills.
You can use Performance instead of Diplomacy to Make an Impression and instead of
Intimidation to Demoralize. You can also use an acting Performance instead of Deception to
Impersonate. You can use your proficiency rank in Performance to meet the requirements
of skill feats that require a particular rank in Deception, Diplomacy, or Intimidation.
2ND LEVEL
CANTRIP EXPANSION FEAT 2
BARD
Study broadens your range of simple spells. Add two additional cantrips from your spell list
to your repertoire.
ESOTERIC POLYMATH FEAT 2
BARD
Prerequisites polymath muse
You keep a book of occult spells, similar to a wizard’s spellbook, and can use its spells to
supplement your spell repertoire. Add all the spells in your repertoire to this book for free.
You can use the Occultism skill to Learn Spells (page 238) and add them to your spellbook by
paying the appropriate cost, similar to a wizard.
During your daily preparations, choose any one spell from your book of occult spells. If that
spell is already in your spell repertoire, you can treat it as an additional signature spell that
day. If it isn’t in your repertoire, treat it as though it were until your next daily preparations.
INSPIRE COMPETENCE FEAT 2
BARD
Prerequisites maestro muse
You learn the inspire competence composition cantrip (page 386), which aids your allies’ skills.
LOREMASTER’S ETUDE FEAT 2
BARD FORTUNE
Prerequisites enigma muse, focus pool
You magically unlock memories, making them easier to recall. You learn the loremaster’s etude
composition spell (page 387). Increase the number of Focus Points in your focus pool by 1.
MULTIFARIOUS MUSE FEAT 2
BARD
Your muse doesn’t fall into a single label. Choose a type of muse other than that of your
own. You gain a 1st-level feat that requires that muse, and your muse is now also a muse of
that type, allowing you to take feats with the other muse as a prerequisite. You don’t gain
any of the other effects of the muse you chose.
Special You can take this feat multiple times. Each time you do, you must choose a
different type of muse other than that of your own.
4TH LEVEL
INSPIRE DEFENSE FEAT 4
BARD
Prerequisites maestro muse
You learn the inspire defense composition cantrip (page 386), which protects you and allies.
BARD FEATS
If you need to look up a bard
feat by name instead of by level,
use this table.
Feat Level
Allegro 14
Bardic Lore 1
Cantrip Expansion 2
Deep Lore 18
Dirge of Doom 6
Eclectic Polymath 12
Eclectic Skill 8
Effortless Concentration 16
Esoteric Polymath 2
Eternal Composition 18
Fatal Aria 20
Harmonize 6
House of Imaginary Walls 10
Impossible Polymath 18
Inspire Competence 2
Inspire Defense 4
Inspire Heroics 8
Inspirational Focus 12
Know-It-All 8
Lingering Composition 1
Loremaster’s Etude 2
Melodious Spell 4
Multifarious Muse 2
Perfect Encore 20
Quickened Casting 10
Reach Spell 1
Soothing Ballad 14
Steady Spellcasting 6
Studious Capacity 16
Symphony of the Muse 20
Triple Time 4
True Hypercognition 14
Unusual Composition 10
Versatile Performance 1
Versatile Signature 4
Core Rulebook
100
MELODIOUS SPELL [one-action] FEAT 4
BARD CONCENTRATE MANIPULATE METAMAGIC
You subtly weave your spellcasting into your performance.
If the next action you take is to Cast a Spell, attempt a
Performance check against all observers’ Perception DCs. If
your Performance check is successful against an observer’s
Perception DC, that observer doesn’t notice that you are
Casting a Spell, even though normally spells have sensory
manifestations that would make spellcasting obvious
to those around you, and verbal, somatic, and material
components are extremely overt. You hide all of these as part
of an ordinary performance.
This hides only the spell’s spellcasting actions and
manifestations, not its effects, so an observer might still see a
ray streak out from you or see you vanish.
TRIPLE TIME FEAT 4
BARD
You learn the triple time composition cantrip (page 387),
which speeds up you and your allies for a round.
VERSATILE SIGNATURE FEAT 4
BARD
Prerequisites polymath muse
While most bards are known for certain signature
performances and spells, you’re always tweaking your
available repertoire. When you make your daily preparations,
you can change one of your signature spells to a different
spell of that level from your repertoire.
6TH LEVEL
DIRGE OF DOOM FEAT 6
BARD
You learn the dirge of doom composition cantrip (page 386),
which frightens your enemies.
HARMONIZE [one-action] FEAT 6
BARD CONCENTRATE MANIPULATE METAMAGIC
Prerequisites maestro muse
You can perform multiple compositions simultaneously. If your
next action is to cast a composition, it becomes a harmonized
composition. Unlike a normal composition, a harmonized
composition doesn’t end if you cast another composition,
and you can cast another composition on the same turn as
a harmonized one. Casting another harmonized composition
ends any harmonized composition you have in effect.
STEADY SPELLCASTING FEAT 6
BARD
You don’t lose spells easily. If a reaction would disrupt your
spellcasting action, attempt a DC 15 flat check. If you succeed,
your action isn’t disrupted.
8TH LEVEL
ECLECTIC SKILL FEAT 8
BARD
Prerequisites polymath muse, master in Occultism
101
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SAMPLE BARD
DANCER
Through myriad styles of dance, you inspire your
allies and channel otherworldly magic.
ABILITY SCORES
Make Charisma highest, followed by Dexterity. Add to
Constitution for more health and to Intelligence for skills.
SKILLS
Acrobatics, Athletics, Diplomacy, Medicine, Occultism,
Performance
MUSE
Maestro
HIGHER-LEVEL FEATS
Inspire Competence (2nd), Triple Time (4th), Allegro (14th)
SPELL REPERTOIRE
1st color spray, illusory disguise, soothe; Cantrips detect
magic, ghost sound, light, mage hand, read aura
Your broad experiences translate to a range of skills. You add
your level to all skill checks in which you are untrained. You
can attempt any skill check that normally requires you to
be trained, even if you are untrained. If you have legendary
proficiency in Occultism, you can attempt any skill check
that normally requires you to have expert proficiency, even if
untrained or trained.
INSPIRE HEROICS FEAT 8
BARD
Prerequisites maestro muse, focus pool
Your performances inspire even greater deeds in your allies.
You learn the inspire heroics metamagic focus spell (page 387).
Increase the number of Focus Points in your focus pool by 1.
KNOW-IT-ALL FEAT 8
BARD
Prerequisites enigma muse
When you succeed at a Knowledge check, you gain additional
information or context. When you critically succeed at a
Knowledge check, at the GM’s discretion you might gain even
more additional information or context than normal.
10TH LEVEL
HOUSE OF IMAGINARY WALLS FEAT 10
BARD
You erect an imaginary barrier others believe to be real. You learn
the house of imaginary walls composition cantrip (page 386).
QUICKENED CASTING [free-action] FEAT 10
BARD CONCENTRATE METAMAGIC
Frequency once per day
If your next action is to cast a bard cantrip or a bard spell
that is at least 2 levels lower than the highest level bard
spell you can cast, reduce the number of actions to cast it by
1 (minimum 1 action).
UNUSUAL COMPOSITION [one-action] FEAT 10
BARD CONCENTRATE MANIPULATE METAMAGIC
Prerequisites polymath muse
You can translate the emotion and power of a composition to
other mediums. If your next action is to cast a composition spell,
you can use a different kind of performance than usual for the
composition to change any of its somatic components to verbal
components or vice versa. As usual for composition spells, this
changes whether the composition is auditory or visual.
12TH LEVEL
ECLECTIC POLYMATH FEAT 12
BARD
Prerequisites Esoteric Polymath
Your flexible mind can quickly shift spells. If you add a spell to
your repertoire during your daily preparations using Esoteric
Polymath, when you prepare again, you can choose to keep the
Core Rulebook
102
new spell from Esoteric Polymath in your repertoire and instead
lose access to another spell of the same level in your repertoire.
INSPIRATIONAL FOCUS FEAT 12
BARD
Your connection to your muse has granted you unusual focus.
If you have spent at least 2 Focus Points since the last time
you Refocused, you recover 2 Focus Points when you Refocus
instead of 1.
14TH LEVEL
ALLEGRO FEAT 14
BARD
You can quicken your allies with a fast-paced performance.
You learn the allegro composition cantrip (page 386).
SOOTHING BALLAD FEAT 14
BARD
Prerequisites focus pool
You soothe your allies’ wounds with the power of your
performance. You learn the soothing ballad composition spell
(page 387). Increase the number of Focus Points in your
focus pool by 1.
TRUE HYPERCOGNITION [one-action] FEAT 14
BARD
Prerequisites enigma muse
Your mind works at an incredible pace. You instantly use up to
five Recall Knowledge actions. If you have any special abilities
or free actions that would normally be triggered when you
Recall Knowledge, you can’t use them for these actions.
16TH LEVEL
EFFORTLESS CONCENTRATION [free-action] FEAT 16
BARD
Requirement You haven’t acted yet on your turn.
You can maintain a spell with hardly a thought. You immediately
gain the effects of a Sustain a Spell action, allowing you to
extend the duration of one of your active bard spells.
STUDIOUS CAPACITY FEAT 16
BARD
Prerequisites enigma muse, legendary in Occultism
Your continued study of occult magic has increased your
magical capacity, allowing you to cast spells even when it seems
impossible. You can cast one spell each day even after you’ve
run out of spell slots of the appropriate spell level, but you can’t
use this ability to cast a spell of your highest spell level.
18TH LEVEL
DEEP LORE FEAT 18
BARD
Prerequisites enigma muse, legendary in Occultism
Your repertoire is vast, containing far more spells than usual.
Add one spell to your repertoire of each level you can cast.
ETERNAL COMPOSITION FEAT 18
BARD
Prerequisites maestro muse
The world is a stage upon which you are always playing. You
are permanently quickened; you can use your extra action
only to cast a composition cantrip that requires 1 action to
cast. While in exploration mode, you can declare that you are
performing an eligible composition cantrip while using any
exploration tactic. Even before your first turn in a combat
encounter, that cantrip is active as if you had cast it on your
previous turn.
IMPOSSIBLE POLYMATH FEAT 18
BARD
Prerequisites trained in Arcana, Nature, or Religion,
Esoteric Polymath
Your esoteric formulas are so unusual that they allow you to
dabble in magic from diverse traditions that other bards don’t
understand. As long as you’re trained in Arcana, you can add
arcane spells to your book from Esoteric Polymath; as long
as you’re trained in Nature, you can add primal spells to your
book; and as long as you are trained in Religion, you can add
divine spells to your book.
Like your other spells in your book, you can add one of
these spells from another tradition to your repertoire as an
occult spell each day using Esoteric Polymath, but you can’t
retain any spells from another tradition when you prepare
again, even if you have Eclectic Polymath.
20TH LEVEL
FATAL ARIA FEAT 20
BARD
Prerequisites focus pool
Your songs overwhelm the target with unbearable emotion,
potentially striking them dead on the spot. You learn the
fatal aria composition spell (page 386). Increase the number
of Focus Points in your focus pool by 1.
PERFECT ENCORE FEAT 20
BARD
Prerequisites magnum opus
You develop another incredible creation. You gain an additional
10th-level spell slot.
SYMPHONY OF THE MUSE FEAT 20
BARD
Prerequisites Harmonize
You are able to weave countless performances together
into a solo symphony. You are no longer limited to a single
composition each turn or a single composition at a time;
when you use a new composition, all previous compositions’
effects continue for their remaining duration.
103
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Core Rulebook
104
Champion
During combat encounters...
You confront enemies in hand-to-hand combat while carefully positioning yourself
to protect your allies.
During social encounters...
You are a voice of hope, striving to reach a peaceful solution that strengthens bonds
and yields good results for all.
While exploring...
You overcome barriers both physical and spiritual, providing inspiration to your
allies through your actions and—when your fellow adventurers ask for it—providing
moral and ethical guidance.
In downtime...
You spend much of your time in solemn prayer and contemplation, rigorous training,
charity work, and fulfilling the tenets of your code, but that doesn’t mean there isn’t
time to take up a craft or hobby.
You Might...
• Believe there is always hope that good will triumph over evil, no matter how grim
the odds.
• Know the ends don’t justify the means, since evil acts increase the power of evil.
• Have a strong sense of right and wrong, and grow frustrated when greed or
shortsightedness breeds evil.
Others Probably...
• See you as a symbol of hope, especially in a time of great need.
• Worry you secretly despise them for not living up to your impossible standard, or
that you are unwilling to compromise when necessary.
• Know that you’ve sworn divine oaths of service they can trust you to keep.
You are an emissary of a deity, a devoted servant who has taken up a weighty
mantle, and you adhere to a code that holds you apart from those around
you. While champions exist for every alignment, as a champion of good, you
provide certainty and hope to the innocent. You have powerful defenses that you share freely
with your allies and innocent bystanders, as well as holy power you use to end the threat of
evil. Your devotion even attracts the attention of holy spirits who aid you on your journey.
INITIAL PROFICIENCIES
At 1st level, you gain the
listed proficiency ranks in
the following statistics. You
are untrained in anything
not listed unless you gain a
better proficiency rank in some
other way.
PERCEPTION
Trained in Perception
SAVING THROWS
Expert in Fortitude
Trained in Reflex
Expert in Will
SKILLS
Trained in Religion
Trained in one skill determined
by your choice of deity
Trained in a number of
additional skills equal to
2 plus your Intelligence
modifier
ATTACKS
Trained in simple weapons
Trained in martial weapons
Trained in unarmed attacks
DEFENSES
Trained in all armor
Trained in unarmored defense
CLASS DC
Trained in champion class DC
SPELLS
Trained in divine spell attacks
Trained in divine spell DCs
KEY ABILITY
STRENGTH OR DEXTERITY
At 1st level, your class gives you
an ability boost to your choice of
Strength or Dexterity.
HIT POINTS
10 plus your Constitution modifier
You increase your maximum number of
HP by this number at 1st level and every
level thereafter.
CLASSES 3
105
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Class Features
You gain these abilities as a champion. Abilities gained at
higher levels list the requisite levels next to their names.
Ancestry and Background
In addition to the abilities provided by your class at 1st
level, you have the benefits of your selected ancestry and
background, as described in Chapter 2.
Initial Proficiencies
At 1st level, you gain a number of proficiencies that
represent your basic training, noted at the start of this class.
Champion’s Code
You follow a code of conduct, beginning with tenets
shared by all champions of an alignment (such as good),
and continuing with tenets of your cause. Deities often add
additional strictures (for instance, Torag’s champions can’t
show mercy to enemies of their people, making it almost
impossible for them to follow the redeemer cause). Only rules
for good champions appear in this book. Tenets are listed
in order of importance, starting with the most important.
If a situation places two tenets in conflict, you aren’t in a
no-win situation; instead, follow the more important tenet.
For instance, as a paladin, if an evil king asked you if you’re
hiding refugees so he could execute them, you could lie
to him, since the tenet against lying is less important than
preventing harm to innocents. Trying to subvert your code
by creating a situation that forces a higher tenet to override
a lower tenet (for example, promising not to respect
authorities and then, to keep your word, disrespecting
authorities) is a violation of the champion code.
If you stray from your alignment or violate your code of
conduct, you lose your focus pool and divine ally until you
demonstrate your repentance by conducting an atone ritual
(page 409), but you keep any other champion abilities that
don’t require those class features. If your alignment shifts
but is still one allowed by your deity, your GM might let
you retrain your cause while still following the same deity.
The Tenets of Good
All champions of good alignment follow these tenets.
• You must never perform acts anathema to your
deity or willingly commit an evil act, such as
murder, torture, or the casting of an evil spell.
• You must never knowingly harm an innocent, or
allow immediate harm to one through inaction
when you know you could reasonably prevent it.
This tenet doesn’t force you to take action against
possible harm to innocents at an indefinite time in
the future, or to sacrifice your life to protect them.
Deity and Cause
Champions are divine servants of a deity. Choose a deity
to follow (pages 437–440); your alignment must be one
allowed for followers of your deity. Actions fundamentally
opposed to your deity’s ideals or alignment are anathema
to your faith. A few examples of acts that would be
considered anathema appear in each deity’s entry. You and
your GM determine whether other acts are anathema.
You have one of the following causes. Your cause must
match your alignment exactly. Your cause determines
your champion’s reaction, grants you a devotion spell
(page 107), and defines part of your champion’s code.
Paladin (Lawful Good)
You’re honorable, forthright, and committed to pushing
back the forces of cruelty. You gain the Retributive Strike
champion’s reaction and the lay on hands devotion spell.
After the tenets of good, add these tenets:
• You must act with honor, never taking advantage
of others, lying, or cheating.
• You must respect the lawful authority of legitimate
leadership wherever you go, and follow its laws.
Redeemer (Neutral Good)
You’re full of kindness and forgiveness. You gain the
Glimpse of Redemption champion’s reaction and the lay on
hands devotion spell. After the tenets of good, add these:
TABLE 3–7: CHAMPION ADVANCEMENT
Your
Level Class Features
1 Ancestry and background, initial proficiencies, champion’s
code, deity and cause, deific weapon, champion’s reaction,
devotion spells, champion feat, shield block
2 Champion feat, skill feat
3 Divine ally, general feat, skill increase
4 Champion feat, skill feat
5 Ability boosts, ancestry feat, skill increase,
weapon expertise
6 Champion feat, skill feat
7 Armor expertise, general feat, skill increase,
weapon specialization
8 Champion feat, skill feat
9 Ancestry feat, champion expertise, divine smite,
juggernaut, lightning reflexes, skill increase
10 Ability boosts, champion feat, skill feat
11 Alertness, divine will, exalt, general feat, skill increase
12 Champion feat, skill feat
13 Ancestry feat, armor mastery, skill increase,
weapon mastery
14 Champion feat, skill feat
15 Ability boosts, general feat, greater weapon
specialization, skill increase
16 Champion feat, skill feat
17 Ancestry feat, champion mastery, legendary armor,
skill increase
18 Champion feat, skill feat
19 General feat, hero’s defiance, skill increase
20 Ability boosts, champion feat, skill feat
Core Rulebook
106
• You must first try to redeem those who commit
evil acts, rather than killing them or meting out
punishment. If they then continue on a wicked path,
you might need to take more extreme measures.
• You must show compassion for others, regardless
of their authority or station.
Liberator (Chaotic Good)
You’re committed to defending the freedom of others.
You gain the Liberating Step champion’s reaction and
the lay on hands devotion spell. After the tenets of good,
add these tenets:
• You must respect the choices others make over their
own lives, and you can’t force someone to act in a
particular way or threaten them if they don’t.
• You must demand and fight for others’ freedom to
make their own decisions. You may never engage
in or countenance slavery or tyranny.
Deific Weapon
You zealously bear your deity’s favored weapon. If it’s
uncommon, you gain access to it. If it’s a simple weapon,
increase the damage die by one step (d4 to d6, d6 to d8,
d8 to d10, d10 to d12).
Champion’s Reaction
Your cause gives you a special reaction: Retributive
Strike for paladin, Glimpse of Redemption for
redeemer, or Liberating Step for liberator.
RETRIBUTIVE STRIKE [reaction]
CHAMPION
Trigger An enemy damages your ally, and both are within
15 feet of you.
You protect your ally and strike your foe. The ally gains
resistance to all damage against the triggering damage
equal to 2 + your level. If the foe is within reach, make a
melee Strike against it.
GLIMPSE OF REDEMPTION [reaction]
CHAMPION
Trigger An enemy damages your ally, and
both are within 15 feet of you.
Your foe hesitates under the weight of sin as
visions of redemption play in their mind’s eye. The
foe must choose one of the following options:
• The ally is unharmed by the triggering damage.
• The ally gains resistance to all damage against
the triggering damage equal to 2 + your level.
After the damaging effect is applied, the enemy
becomes enfeebled 2 until the end of its next turn.
LIBERATING STEP [reaction]
CHAMPION
Trigger An enemy damages, Grabs, or Grapples your ally, and
both are within 15 feet of you.
You free an ally from restraint. If the trigger was an ally
taking damage, the ally gains resistance to all damage
against the triggering damage equal to 2 + your level. The
ally can attempt to break free of effects grabbing, restraining,
immobilizing, or paralyzing them. They either attempt a new
save against one such effect that allows a save, or attempt
to Escape from one effect as a free action. If they can move,
the ally can Step as a free action, even if they didn’t need
to escape.
107
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
skill increase. You can use this increase either to increase
your proficiency rank to trained in one skill you’re
untrained in, or to increase your proficiency rank in one
skill in which you’re already trained to expert.
At 7th level, you can use skill increases to increase
your proficiency rank to master in a skill in which you’re
already an expert, and at 15th level, you can use them to
increase your proficiency rank to legendary in a skill in
which you’re already a master.
Ability Boosts 5th
At 5th level and every 5 levels thereafter, boost four
different ability scores. You can use these boosts to
increase ability scores above 18. Boosting an ability score
increases it by 1 if it’s already 18 or above, or by 2 if it
starts out below 18.
Ancestry Feats 5th
In addition to the ancestry feat you started with, you gain
an ancestry feat at 5th level and every 4 levels thereafter.
The list of ancestry feats available to you can be found in
your ancestry’s entry in Chapter 2.
Weapon Expertise 5th
You’ve dedicated yourself to learning the intricacies of
your weapons. Your proficiency ranks for simple weapons
and martial weapons increase to expert.
Armor Expertise 7th
You have spent so much time in armor that you know
how to make the most of its protection. Your proficiency
ranks for light, medium, and heavy armor, as well as for
unarmored defense, increase to expert. You gain the armor
specialization effects of medium and heavy armor.
Weapon Specialization 7th
You’ve learned how to inflict greater injuries with the
weapons you know best. You deal 2 additional damage
with weapons and unarmed attacks in which you are an
expert. This damage increases to 3 if you’re a master, and to
4 if you’re legendary.
Champion Expertise 9th
Prayers strengthen your divine power. Your proficiency
ranks for your champion class DC and divine spell attack
rolls and DCs increase to expert.
Divine Smite 9th
Your champion’s reaction improves.
Paladin: You surround evil targets in a punishing halo.
If you hit with your Retributive Strike, the target takes
persistent good damage equal to your Charisma modifier.
Redeemer: A guilty conscience assails foes who spurn
your Glimpse of Redemption. A foe that responds to
your Glimpse of Redemption by dealing damage takes
persistent good damage equal to your Charisma modifier.
Devotion Spells
Your deity’s power grants you special divine spells called
devotion spells, which are a type of focus spell. It costs 1
Focus Point to cast a focus spell, and you start with a focus
pool of 1 Focus Point. You refill your focus pool during
your daily preparations, and you regain 1 Focus Point by
spending 10 minutes using the Refocus activity to pray to
your deity or do service toward their causes.
Focus spells are automatically heightened to half your
level rounded up. Certain feats can give you more focus
spells and increase the size of your focus pool, though your
focus pool can never hold more than 3 Focus Points. The full
rules are on page 300. You gain a devotion spell depending
on your cause, and you are trained in divine spell attack
rolls and spell DCs. Your spellcasting ability is Charisma.
Champion Feats
At 1st level and every even-numbered level thereafter,
you gain a champion class feat. Champion class feats are
presented beginning on page 109.
Shield Block
You gain the Shield Block general feat (page 266), a
reaction that lets you reduce damage with your shield.
Skill Feats 2nd
At 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a
skill feat. Skill feats can be found in Chapter 5 and
have the skill trait. You must be trained or better in the
corresponding skill to select a skill feat.
Divine Ally 3rd
Your devotion attracts a spirit of your deity’s alignment.
Once you choose an ally, your choice can’t be changed.
The following are divine allies:
Blade Ally: A spirit of battle dwells within your weapon.
Select one weapon when you make your daily preparations.
In your hands, the weapon gains the effect of a property
rune. For a champion following the tenets of good, choose
disrupting, ghost touch, returning, or shifting. You also
gain the weapon’s critical specialization effect.
Shield Ally: A spirit of protection dwells within your
shield. In your hands, the shield’s Hardness increases by 2
and its HP and BT increase by half.
Steed Ally: You gain a young animal companion as a
mount (page 214). Ordinarily, your animal companion is
one that has the mount special ability, such as a horse. You
can select a different animal companion (GM’s discretion),
but this ability doesn’t grant it the mount special ability.
General Feats 3rd
At 3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter, you gain a
general feat. General feats are listed in Chapter 5.
Skill Increases 3rd
At 3rd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a
Core Rulebook
108
Liberator: You punish those who ensnare your allies
in bondage. If the triggering enemy was using any effects
to make your ally grabbed, restrained, immobilized, or
paralyzed when you used Liberating Step, that enemy takes
persistent good damage equal to your Charisma modifier.
Juggernaut 9th
Your body is accustomed to physical hardship and
resistant to ailments. Your proficiency rank for Fortitude
saves increases to master. When you roll a success on a
Fortitude save, you get a critical success instead.
Lightning Reflexes 9th
Your reflexes are lightning fast. Your proficiency rank for
Reflex saves increases to expert.
Alertness 11th
You remain alert to threats around you. Your proficiency
rank for Perception increases to expert.
Divine Will 11th
Your faith grants mastery of your will. Your proficiency
rank for Will saves increases to master. When you roll a
success on a Will save, you get a critical success instead.
Exalt 11th
Your champion’s reaction exalts nearby allies, allowing
them to benefit as well.
Paladin: When you use Retributive Strike, each ally
within 15 feet of you with the target in their melee reach
can spend a reaction to Strike the target with a –5 penalty.
Redeemer: You protect multiple allies. You can apply
the resistance granted by Glimpse of Redemption to
yourself and all allies within 15 feet of you, including the
triggering ally, except the resistance is reduced by 2 for all.
Liberator: You can help your whole group get into
position. When you use Liberating Step, if your ally doesn’t
attempt to break free of an effect, you and all allies within
15 feet can Step, in addition to the triggering ally.
Armor Mastery 13th
Your skill with armor improves, helping you avoid more
blows. Your proficiency ranks for light, medium, and heavy
armor, as well as for unarmored defense, increase to master.
Weapon Mastery 13th
You fully understand your weapons. Your proficiency
ranks for simple and martial weapons increase to master.
Greater Weapon Specialization 15th
Your damage from weapon specialization increases to 4
with weapons and unarmed attacks in which you’re an
expert, 6 if you’re a master, and 8 if you’re legendary.
Champion Mastery 17th
You’ve mastered your arsenal of champion techniques
and divine spells. Your proficiency ranks for your
champion class DC and for divine spell attack rolls and
spell DCs increase to master.
Legendary Armor 17th
You shield yourself with steel as easily as with faith. Your
proficiency ranks for light, medium, and heavy armor, as
well as for unarmored defense, increase to legendary.
Hero’s Defiance 19th
You can defy fate and continue fighting as long as
you have divine energy. You gain the hero’s defiance
devotion spell.
Champion Feats
At each level that you gain a champion feat, you can
select one of the following feats. You must satisfy any
prerequisites before selecting the feat.
1ST LEVEL
DEITY’S DOMAIN FEAT 1
CHAMPION
You embody an aspect of your deity. Choose one of your
deity’s domains from those listed on page 441. You gain the
domain’s initial domain spell as a devotion spell.
RANGED REPRISAL FEAT 1
CHAMPION
Prerequisites paladin cause
You can use Retributive Strike with a ranged weapon. In
addition, if the foe that triggered your reaction is within 5 feet
of your reach but not in your reach, as part of your reaction
you can Step to put the foe in your reach before making a
melee Retributive Strike.
UNIMPEDED STEP FEAT 1
CHAMPION
Prerequisites liberator cause
KEY TERMS
You’ll see these terms in many champion abilities.
Flourish: Flourishes are techniques that require too
much exertion to perform a large number in a row. You
can use only 1 action with the flourish trait per turn.
Metamagic: These actions tweak your spells. You must
use a metamagic action directly before Casting the Spell
you want to alter. If you use any action (including free
actions and reactions) other than Cast a Spell directly
after, you waste the benefits of the metamagic action.
Effects added by a metamagic action are part of the
spell’s effect, not of the metamagic action.
Oath: Oaths add an additional tenet to your code. You
can usually have only one feat with this trait.
109
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
CHAMPION FEATS
If you need to look up a
champion feat by name instead
of by level, use this table.
Feat Level
Advanced Deity’s Domain 8
Affliction Mercy 12
Anchoring Aura 14
Attack of Opportunity 6
Aura of Courage 4
Aura of Faith 12
Aura of Life 14
Aura of Righteousness 14
Aura of Vengeance 14
Auspicious Mount 16
Blade of Justice 12
Celestial Form 18
Celestial Mount 20
Champion’s Sacrifice 12
Deity’s Domain 1
Devoted Focus 10
Divine Grace 2
Divine Health 4
Divine Reflexes 14
Divine Wall 12
Dragonslayer Oath 2
Fiendsbane Oath 2
Greater Mercy 8
Heal Mount 8
Imposing Destrier 10
Instrument of Zeal 16
Lasting Doubt 12
Liberating Stride 12
Litany against Sloth 10
Litany against Wrath 6
Litany of Righteousness 14
Loyal Warhorse 6
Mercy 4
Quick Block 8
Radiant Blade Master 20
Radiant Blade Spirit 10
Ranged Reprisal 1
Second Ally 8
Sense Evil 8
Shield Paragon 20
Shield of Grace 16
Shield of Reckoning 10
Shield Warden 6
Shining Oath 2
Smite Evil 6
Ultimate Mercy 18
Unimpeded Step 1
Vengeful Oath 2
Weight of Guilt 1
Wyrmbane Aura 14
With a burst of divine liberation, your ally’s movement from your Liberating Step is
unaffected by difficult terrain, greater difficult terrain, narrow surfaces, and uneven ground.
WEIGHT OF GUILT FEAT 1
CHAMPION
Prerequisites redeemer cause
Guilt clouds the minds of those who ignore your Glimpse of Redemption. Instead of making
the triggering creature enfeebled 2, you can make it stupefied 2 for the same duration.
2ND LEVEL
DIVINE GRACE [reaction] FEAT 2
CHAMPION
Trigger You attempt a save against a spell, before you roll.
You call upon your deity’s grace, gaining a +2 circumstance bonus to the save.
DRAGONSLAYER OATH FEAT 2
CHAMPION OATH
Prerequisites tenets of good
You’ve sworn to slay evil dragons. Add the following tenet to your code after the others: “You
must slay evil dragons you encounter as long as you have a reasonable chance of success.”
Your Retributive Strike gains a +4 circumstance bonus to damage against an evil dragon, or
+6 if you have master proficiency with the weapon you used. Your Glimpse of Redemption’s
resistance against damage from an evil dragon is 7 + your level. If you use Liberating Step
triggered by an evil dragon, your ally gains a +4 circumstance bonus to checks granted by
your Liberating Step, and the ally can Step twice afterward.
You don’t consider evil dragons to be legitimate authorities, even in nations they rule.
FIENDSBANE OATH FEAT 2
CHAMPION OATH
Prerequisites tenets of good
You’ve sworn an oath to banish the corruption of fiends to the dark planes they call home.
Add the following tenet to your champion’s code after the other tenets: “You must banish
or slay fiends you come across as long as you have a reasonable chance of success; in the
incredibly unlikely event you find a good fiend, you don’t have to banish or kill it.”
Your Retributive Strike gains a +4 circumstance bonus to damage against a fiend, or
a +6 circumstance bonus if you have master proficiency with the weapon you used. Your
Glimpse of Redemption’s resistance against damage from a fiend is 7 + your level. If you
use Liberating Step triggered by a fiend, your ally gains a +4 circumstance bonus to checks
granted by your Liberating Step, and the ally can Step twice afterward.
You don’t consider fiends to be legitimate authorities, even in nations ruled by fiends.
SHINING OATH FEAT 2
CHAMPION OATH
Prerequisites tenets of good
You’ve sworn an oath to put the undead to rest. Add the following tenet to your champion’s
code after the other tenets: “You must end the existence of undead you encounter as long as
you have a reasonable chance of success; in the unlikely event you find a good undead, you
can try to work out a more peaceful way to help it recover from its undead state rather than
destroying it in combat, such as helping it complete its unfinished business and find peace.”
Your Retributive Strike gains a +4 circumstance bonus to damage against an undead, or
+6 if you have master proficiency with the weapon you used. Your Glimpse of Redemption’s
resistance against damage from an undead is 7 + your level. If you use Liberating Step
triggered by an undead, your ally gains a +4 circumstance bonus to checks granted by your
Liberating Step, and the ally can Step twice afterward.
You don’t consider undead to be legitimate authorities, even in nations ruled by undead.
Core Rulebook
110
VENGEFUL OATH FEAT 2
CHAMPION OATH
Prerequisites paladin cause
You’ve sworn an oath to hunt down wicked evildoers and
bring them to judgment. Add the following tenet to your code
after the others: “You must hunt down and exterminate evil
creatures that have committed heinous atrocities as long as
you have a reasonable chance of success and aren’t engaged
in a mission that would prevent your doing so.”
You can use lay on hands to damage a creature you witness
harming an innocent or a good ally as if it were undead; in this
case, lay on hands deals good damage instead of positive damage
and gains the good trait. This good damage can affect non-evil
creatures. This doesn’t prevent you from healing such a creature
with lay on hands; you choose whether to heal or harm.
4TH LEVEL
AURA OF COURAGE FEAT 4
CHAMPION
Prerequisites tenets of good
You stand strong in the face of danger and inspire your allies
to do the same. Whenever you become frightened, reduce the
condition value by 1 (to a minimum of 0). At the end of your
turn when you would reduce your frightened condition value
by 1, you also reduce the value by 1 for all allies within 15 feet.
DIVINE HEALTH FEAT 4
CHAMPION
Prerequisites tenets of good
Your faith makes you resistant to disease, protecting you as
you offer succor to the ill. You gain a +1 status bonus to saves
against diseases. In addition, if you roll a success on a save
against a disease, you get a critical success instead.
MERCY [one-action] FEAT 4
CHAMPION CONCENTRATE METAMAGIC
Prerequisites devotion spell (lay on hands)
Your touch relieves fear and restores movement. If the next action
you use is to cast lay on hands, you can attempt to counteract a
fear effect or an effect imposing the paralyzed condition on the
target, in addition to the other benefits of lay on hands.
6TH LEVEL
ATTACK OF OPPORTUNITY [reaction] FEAT 6
CHAMPION
Trigger A creature within your reach uses a manipulate action
or a move action, makes a ranged attack, or leaves a square
during a move action it’s using.
You lash out at a foe that leaves an opening. Make a melee
Strike against the triggering creature. If your attack is a
critical hit and the trigger was a manipulate action, you disrupt
111
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SAMPLE CHAMPION that action. This Strike doesn’t count toward your multiple
attack penalty, and your multiple attack penalty doesn’t apply
to this Strike.
LITANY AGAINST WRATH FEAT 6
CHAMPION
Prerequisites devotion spells, tenets of good
You excoriate a foe for its wrath against goodly creatures. You
can cast the litany against wrath devotion spell. Increase the
number of Focus Points in your focus pool by 1.
LOYAL WARHORSE FEAT 6
CHAMPION
Prerequisites divine ally (steed)
You and your mount have grown closer, and your loyalty to
each other is unbreakable. The mount you gained through the
divine ally class feature is now a mature animal companion
(page 214). In addition, your mount never attacks you, even if
it is magically compelled to do so.
SHIELD WARDEN FEAT 6
CHAMPION
Prerequisites divine ally (shield), tenets of good
You use your shield to protect your allies as well as yourself.
When you have a shield raised, you can use your Shield Block
reaction when an attack is made against an ally adjacent to
you. If you do, the shield prevents that ally from taking damage
instead of preventing you from taking damage, following the
normal rules for Shield Block.
SMITE EVIL [one-action] FEAT 6
CHAMPION
Prerequisites divine ally (blade)
Your blade ally becomes an even more powerful tool against
evildoers. Select one foe you can see. Until the start of your
next turn, your Strikes with the weapon your blade ally inhabits
against that foe deal an extra 4 good damage, increasing to 6
if you have master proficiency with this weapon.
If the foe attacks one of your allies, the duration extends to
the end of that foe’s next turn. If the foe continues to attack
your allies each turn, the duration continues to extend.
8TH LEVEL
ADVANCED DEITY’S DOMAIN FEAT 8
CHAMPION
Prerequisites Deity’s Domain
Through your conviction, you have glimpsed the deeper
secrets of your deity’s domain. You gain an advanced domain
spell from the domain you chose with Deity’s Domain. You
can cast that spell as a devotion spell. Increase the number of
Focus Points in your focus pool by 1.
GREATER MERCY FEAT 8
CHAMPION
Prerequisites Mercy
REDEEMER
Your truth and compassion glow strong as the sun,
bringing the evil into the light of your goddess, the
Dawnflower.
ABILITY SCORES
Take a high Strength for your combat abilities, and a
good Charisma for your devotion spells.
SKILLS
Athletics, Diplomacy, Religion, Medicine
DEITY AND CAUSE
Sarenrae, redeemer
STARTING FEAT
Deity’s Domain (truth)
HIGHER-LEVEL FEATS
Shining Oath (2nd), Mercy (4th), Litany Against Wrath
(6th), Sense Evil (8th), Devoted Focus (10th), Lasting
Doubt (12th), Ultimate Mercy (18th)
Core Rulebook
112
Your faith enhances your ability to remove conditions. When
you use Mercy, you can instead attempt to counteract the
blinded, deafened, sickened, or slowed conditions.
HEAL MOUNT FEAT 8
CHAMPION
Prerequisites divine ally (steed)
Your devotion to your mount manifests as a surge of positive
energy. When you cast lay on hands on your mount, you can
restore 10 Hit Points, plus 10 for each heightened level.
QUICK BLOCK FEAT 8
CHAMPION
You can block with your shield instinctively. At the start of each
of your turns, you gain an additional reaction that you can use
only to perform a Shield Block.
SECOND ALLY FEAT 8
CHAMPION
Prerequisites divine ally
Your inner grace attracts the attention of a second protective
spirit. Choose a second type of divine ally and gain its benefits.
SENSE EVIL FEAT 8
CHAMPION
Prerequisites tenets of good
You sense evil as a queasy or foreboding feeling. When in the
presence of an aura of evil that is powerful or overwhelming
(page 328), you eventually detect the aura, though you might
not do so instantly, and you can’t pinpoint the location. This
acts as a vague sense, similar to humans’ sense of smell. An
evil creature using a disguise or otherwise trying to hide its
presence attempts a Deception check against your Perception
DC to hide its aura from you. If the creature succeeds at its
Deception check, it is then temporarily immune to your Sense
Evil for 1 day.
10TH LEVEL
DEVOTED FOCUS FEAT 10
CHAMPION
Prerequisites devotion spells
Your devotion is strong enough to increase your focus to
incredible heights. If you have spent at least 2 Focus Points
since the last time you Refocused, you recover 2 Focus Points
when you Refocus instead of 1.
IMPOSING DESTRIER FEAT 10
CHAMPION
Prerequisites divine ally (steed), Loyal Warhorse
Under your care, your mount has realized its innate potential.
The mount you gained through the divine ally class feature is
now a nimble or savage animal companion (page 214). During
an encounter, even if you don’t use the Command an Animal
action, your mount can still use 1 action on your turn to Stride
or Strike.
LITANY AGAINST SLOTH FEAT 10
CHAMPION
Prerequisites devotion spells, tenets of good
You rail against the sin of sloth, turning a foe’s laziness against
it. You can cast the litany against sloth devotion spell. Increase
the number of Focus Points in your focus pool by 1.
RADIANT BLADE SPIRIT FEAT 10
CHAMPION
Prerequisites divine ally (blade)
Your divine ally radiates power, enhancing your chosen
weapon. When you choose the weapon for your blade ally
during your daily preparations, add the following property
runes to the list of effects you can choose from: flaming and
any aligned properties (anarchic, axiomatic, holy, or unholy)
that match your cause’s alignment.
SHIELD OF RECKONING [reaction] FEAT 10
CHAMPION FLOURISH
Prerequisites champion’s reaction, divine ally (shield), tenets
of good, Shield Warden
Trigger A foe’s attack against an ally matches the trigger for
both your Shield Block reaction and your champion’s reaction.
When you shield your ally against an attack, you call upon
your power to protect your ally further. You use the Shield
Block reaction to prevent damage to an ally and also use your
champion’s reaction against the foe that attacked your ally.
12TH LEVEL
AFFLICTION MERCY FEAT 12
CHAMPION
Prerequisites Mercy
The divine grace that flows through you grants reprieve from
an affliction. When you use Mercy, you can instead attempt to
counteract a curse, disease, or poison.
AURA OF FAITH FEAT 12
CHAMPION
Prerequisites tenets of good
You radiate an aura of pure belief that imbues your attacks
and those of nearby allies with holy power. Your Strikes deal
an extra 1 good damage against evil creatures. Also, each
good-aligned ally within 15 feet gains this benefit on their first
Strike that hits an evil creature each round.
BLADE OF JUSTICE [two-actions] FEAT 12
CHAMPION
Prerequisites paladin cause
You call upon divine power and make a weapon or unarmed
Strike against a foe you have witnessed harming an ally or
innocent. The Strike deals two extra weapon damage dice
if the target of your Strike is evil. Whether or not the target
is evil, the Strike applies all effects that normally apply on a
Retributive Strike (such as divine smite), and you can convert all
the physical damage from the attack into good damage.
113
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SAMPLE CHAMPION CHAMPION’S SACRIFICE FEAT 12
CHAMPION
Prerequisites tenets of good
You can suffer so that others might live. You can cast the
champion’s sacrifice devotion spell. Increase the number of
Focus Points in your focus pool by 1.
DIVINE WALL FEAT 12
CHAMPION
Requirements You are wielding a shield.
You use your shield to harry your enemies, preventing them
from stepping away from or around you. All spaces adjacent
to you are difficult terrain for your enemies.
LASTING DOUBT FEAT 12
CHAMPION
Prerequisites redeemer cause
When you cast doubt upon your foes, the effect lasts longer than
usual. After being enfeebled 2 by your Glimpse of Redemption,
the foe is enfeebled 1 for 1 minute. If you have Weight of Guilt,
after being stupefied 2 by your Glimpse of Redemption, the foe
is stupefied 1 for 1 minute or until the flat check from stupefied
causes it to lose a spell, whichever comes first.
LIBERATING STRIDE FEAT 12
CHAMPION
Prerequisites liberator cause
Instead of you taking a Step at the end of your Liberating Step,
the triggering ally can Stride up to half their Speed. Even if
you have exalt, only the triggering ally gains this benefit.
14TH LEVEL
ANCHORING AURA FEAT 14
CHAMPION
Requirements Fiendsbane Oath
Your aura hampers fiends’ teleportation. Your aura attempts
to counteract teleportation spells cast by fiends within 15 feet,
using the spell level and DC of your devotion spells.
AURA OF LIFE FEAT 14
CHAMPION
Requirements Shining Oath
Your aura protects against necromantic effects. You and all
allies within 15 feet gain resistance 5 to negative energy and a
+1 status bonus to saves against necromancy effects.
AURA OF RIGHTEOUSNESS FEAT 14
CHAMPION
Prerequisites tenets of good
Your righteous aura dampens evil’s might. You and all allies
within 15 feet gain evil resistance 5.
AURA OF VENGEANCE FEAT 14
CHAMPION
Requirements exalt, Vengeful Oath
LIBERATOR
With the name of the Savored Sting on your lips,
you free those held against their will and exact
revenge upon their captors.
ABILITY SCORES
Focus on Dexterity. Charisma helps your devotion spells
and Deception, and good Wisdom and Constitution
improve your defenses.
SKILLS
Deception, Religion, Society, Stealth
DEITY AND CAUSE
Calistria, liberator
STARTING FEAT
Unimpeded Step
HIGHER-LEVEL FEATS
Divine Grace (2nd), Aura of Courage (4th), Attack of
Opportunity (6th), Liberating Stride (12th)
Core Rulebook
114
When you call upon others to take retribution, you also guide
their aim. When you use Retributive Strike, your allies who
make Strikes take only a –2 penalty, instead of a –5 penalty.
DIVINE REFLEXES FEAT 14
CHAMPION
At the start of each of your turns, you gain an additional
reaction that you can use only for your champion’s reaction.
LITANY OF RIGHTEOUSNESS FEAT 14
CHAMPION
Prerequisites tenets of good
You call upon righteousness to expose an evil foe’s weakness.
You can cast the litany of righteousness devotion spell.
Increase the number of Focus Points in your focus pool by 1.
WYRMBANE AURA FEAT 14
CHAMPION
Requirements Dragonslayer Oath
Your aura protects against destructive energies and dragons’
breath. You and all allies within 15 feet gain resistance equal to
your Charisma modifier to acid, cold, electricity, fire, and poison.
If the source of one of these types of damage is a dragon’s
breath, increase the resistance to half your level.
16TH LEVEL
AUSPICIOUS MOUNT FEAT 16
CHAMPION
Prerequisites divine ally (steed), Imposing Destrier
Guided by your ongoing care, your steed has developed
incredible intelligence and skill. The mount you gained
through the divine ally class feature is now a specialized
animal companion (page 217). You can select one of the usual
specializations or the auspice specialization.
Auspice mounts gain the following benefits: Your companion
is marked by your deity’s religious symbol as a sacred creature
of your deity. Its proficiency rank in Religion increases to expert,
it can speak the language associated with your deity’s servitors
(Celestial for champions who follow the tenets of good), and its
Intelligence modifier increases by 2 and its Wisdom modifier by 1.
INSTRUMENT OF ZEAL FEAT 16
CHAMPION
Prerequisites divine ally (blade), tenets of good
Divine energy fills your weapon. Whenever you critically hit a
foe with Smite Evil or a Retributive Strike, your attack adds an
extra damage die, and the target is slowed 1 on its next turn.
SHIELD OF GRACE FEAT 16
CHAMPION
Prerequisites Shield Warden
You protect an ally with both your shield and your body.
Whenever you use the Shield Block reaction to prevent damage
to an ally, you can evenly split the remaining damage after the
Shield Block between the ally and yourself.
18TH LEVEL
CELESTIAL FORM FEAT 18
CHAMPION
Prerequisites tenets of good
You take on a celestial countenance, appearing like a type
of celestial who serves your deity; for example, as an angel,
you would gain a halo and feathery wings. You gain a fly
Speed equal to your Speed. You gain darkvision if you don’t
already have it, and you gain the celestial trait and the trait
appropriate to the type of servitor you’ve become (archon,
angel, or azata, for example).
ULTIMATE MERCY FEAT 18
CHAMPION
Prerequisites Mercy
Your mercy transcends the bounds of life and death. When
you use Mercy, you can cast lay on hands on a creature that
died since your last turn to return it to life. The target returns
to life with 1 hit point and becomes wounded 1. You can’t use
Ultimate Mercy if the triggering effect was disintegrate or a
death effect.
20TH LEVEL
CELESTIAL MOUNT FEAT 20
CHAMPION
Prerequisites divine ally (steed), tenets of good
Your steed gains incredible celestial powers granted by your
deity. It gains darkvision, its maximum Hit Points increase by
40, and it gains weakness 10 to evil damage.
Additionally, it grows wings appropriate to a servitor of
your deity (such as metallic wings for an archon), granting it a
fly Speed equal to its Speed. It gains the celestial trait and the
trait appropriate to the type of servitor it has become (archon,
angel, or azata, for example).
RADIANT BLADE MASTER FEAT 20
CHAMPION
Prerequisites divine ally (blade), Radiant Blade Spirit
Your divine ally turns your chosen weapon into a paragon of
its type. When you choose the weapon for your blade divine
ally during your preparations, add the following property
runes to the list of effects you can choose from: dancing,
greater disrupting, and keen.
SHIELD PARAGON FEAT 20
CHAMPION
Prerequisites divine ally (shield)
Your shield is a vessel of divine protection. When you’re
wielding your chosen shield, it is always raised, even without
you using the Raise a Shield action. Your chosen shield doubles
its HP and BT, rather than increasing them by half. If it would
be destroyed, it vanishes to your deity’s realm instead, where
your divine ally repairs it. During your next daily preparations,
the shield returns to you fully repaired.
115
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Core Rulebook
116
Cleric
During combat encounters...
If you’re a warpriest, you balance between casting spells and attacking with weapons—
typically the favored weapon of your deity. If you’re a cloistered cleric, you primarily
cast spells. Most of your spells can boost, protect, or heal your allies. Depending on
your deity, you get extra spells to heal your allies or harm your enemies.
During social encounters...
You might make diplomatic overtures or deliver impressive speeches. Because you’re
wise, you also pick up on falsehoods others tell.
While exploring...
You detect nearby magic and interpret any religious writing you come across. You
might also concentrate on a protective spell for your allies in case of attack. After a
battle or hazard, you might heal anyone who was hurt.
In downtime...
You might perform services at a temple, travel to spread the word of your deity,
research scripture, celebrate holy days, or even found a new temple.
You Might...
• Visit the temples and holy places sacred to your faith, and have an immediate
affinity with other worshippers of your deity.
• Know the teachings of your religion’s holy texts and how they apply to a dilemma.
• Cooperate with your allies, provided they don’t ask you to go against divine will.
Others Probably...
• Find your devotion impressive, even if they don’t understand it.
• Expect you to heal their wounds.
• Rely on you to interact with other religious figures.
INITIAL PROFICIENCIES
At 1st level, you gain the
listed proficiency ranks in
the following statistics. You
are untrained in anything
not listed unless you gain a
better proficiency rank in some
other way.
PERCEPTION
Trained in Perception
SAVING THROWS
Trained in Fortitude
Trained in Reflex
Expert in Will
SKILLS
Trained in Religion
Trained in one skill determined
by your choice of deity
Trained in a number of
additional skills equal to 2 plus
your Intelligence modifier
ATTACKS
Trained in simple weapons
Trained in the favored weapon
of your deity. If your deity’s
favored weapon is uncommon,
you also gain access to
that weapon.
Trained in unarmed attacks
DEFENSES
Untrained in all armor, though
your doctrine might alter this
Trained in unarmored defense
SPELLS
Trained in divine spell attacks
Trained in divine spell DCs
Deities work their will upon the world in infinite ways, and you serve as one
of their most stalwart mortal servants. Blessed with divine magic, you live the
ideals of your faith, adorn yourself with the symbols of your church, and train
diligently to wield your deity’s favored weapon. Your spells might protect and heal your
allies, or they might punish foes and enemies of your faith, as your deity wills. Yours is a life
of devotion, spreading the teachings of your faith through both word and deed.
KEY ABILITY
WISDOM
At 1st level, your class gives you
an ability boost to Wisdom.
HIT POINTS
8 plus your Constitution modifier
You increase your maximum number of
HP by this number at 1st level and every
level thereafter.
CLASSES 3
117
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Class Features
You gain these abilities as a cleric. Abilities gained at
higher levels list requisite levels next to their names.
Ancestry and Background
In addition to the abilities provided by your class at 1st
level, you have the benefits of your selected ancestry and
background, as described in Chapter 2.
Initial Proficiencies
At 1st level, you gain a number of proficiencies that
represent your basic training, noted at the start of this class.
Deity
As a cleric, you are a mortal servitor of a deity you revere
above all others. The most common deities in Pathfinder
appear on pages 437–440, along with their alignments,
areas of concern, and the benefits you get for being a
cleric of that deity. Your alignment must be one allowed
by your deity, as listed in their entry. Your deity grants
you the trained proficiency rank in one skill and with
the deity’s favored weapon. If the favored weapon is
uncommon, you also get access to that weapon.
Your deity also adds spells to your spell list. You can
prepare these just like you can any spell on the divine spell
list, once you can prepare spells of their level as a cleric.
Some of these spells aren’t normally on the divine list, but
they’re divine spells if you prepare them this way.
Anathema
Acts fundamentally opposed to your deity’s alignment
or ideals are anathema to your faith. Learning or casting
spells, committing acts, and using items that are anathema
to your deity remove you from your deity’s good graces.
Casting spells with the evil trait is almost always
anathema to good deities, and casting good spells is
likewise anathema to evil deities; similarly, casting
chaotic spells is anathema to lawful deities, and casting
lawful spells is anathema to chaotic deities. A neutral
cleric who worships a neutral deity isn’t limited this
way, but their alignment might change over time if
they frequently cast spells or use abilities with a certain
alignment. Similarly, casting spells that are anathema to
the tenets or goals of your faith could interfere with your
connection to your deity. For example, casting a spell
to create undead would be anathema to Pharasma, the
goddess of death. For borderline cases, you and your GM
determine which acts are anathema.
If you perform enough acts that are anathema to your
deity, or if your alignment changes to one not allowed by
your deity, you lose the magical abilities that come from
your connection to your deity. The class features that you
lose are determined by the GM, but they likely include
your divine font and all divine spellcasting. These abilities
can be regained only if you demonstrate your repentance
by conducting an atone ritual (found on page 409).
Divine Spellcasting
Your deity bestows on you the power to cast divine spells.
You can cast divine spells using the Cast a Spell activity, and
you can supply material, somatic, and verbal components
when casting spells (see Casting Spells on page 302). Because
you’re a cleric, you can usually hold a divine focus (such as a
religious symbol) for spells requiring material components
instead of needing to use a spell component pouch.
At 1st level, you can prepare two 1st-level spells and
five cantrips each morning from the common spells on
the divine spell list in this book (page 309) or from other
divine spells to which you gain access. Prepared spells
remain available to you until you cast them or until you
prepare your spells again. The number of spells you can
prepare is called your spell slots.
As you increase in level as a cleric, the number of spells
you can prepare each day increases, as does the highest
level of spell you can cast, as shown in Table 3–9: Cleric
Spells per Day on page 120.
Some of your spells require you to attempt a spell
attack roll to see how effective they are, or your enemies
to roll against your spell DC (typically by attempting a
saving throw). Since your key ability is Wisdom, your
spell attack rolls and spell DCs use your Wisdom modifier.
Details on calculating these statistics appear on page 447.
TABLE 3–8: CLERIC ADVANCEMENT
Your
Level Class Features
1 Ancestry and background, initial proficiencies, deity,
divine spellcasting, divine font, doctrine
2 Cleric feat, skill feat
3 2nd-level spells, general feat, second doctrine, skill increase
4 Cleric feat, skill feat
5 3rd-level spells, ability boosts, alertness, ancestry
feat, skill increase
6 Cleric feat, skill feat
7 4th-level spells, general feat, skill increase, third doctrine
8 Cleric feat, skill feat
9 5th-level spells, ancestry feat, resolve, skill increase
10 Ability boosts, cleric feat, skill feat
11 6th-level spells, fourth doctrine, general feat,
lightning reflexes, skill increase
12 Cleric feat, skill feat
13 7th-level spells, ancestry feat, divine defense, skill
increase, weapon specialization
14 Cleric feat, skill feat
15 8th-level spells, ability boosts, fifth doctrine, general
feat, skill increase
16 Cleric feat, skill feat
17 9th-level spells, ancestry feat, skill increase
18 Cleric feat, skill feat
19 Final doctrine, general feat, miraculous spell, skill increase
20 Ability boosts, cleric feat, skill feat
Core Rulebook
118
Heightening Spells
When you get spell slots of 2nd level and higher, you can
fill those slots with stronger versions of lower-level spells.
This increases the spell’s level, heightening it to match the
spell slot. Many spells have specific improvements when
they are heightened to certain levels.
Cantrips
A cantrip is a special type of spell that doesn’t use spell
slots. You can cast a cantrip at will, any number of times
per day. A cantrip is always automatically heightened to
half your level rounded up—this is usually equal to the
highest level of spell you can cast as a cleric. For example,
as a 1st-level cleric, your cantrips are 1st-level spells, and
as a 5th-level cleric, your cantrips are 3rd-level spells.
Divine Font
Through your deity’s blessing, you gain additional spells
that channel either the life force called positive energy or
its counterforce, negative energy. When you
prepare your spells each day, you can
prepare additional heal or harm spells,
depending on your deity. The divine
font spell your deity provides is listed in
the Divine Font entry for your deity on
pages 437–440; if both are listed, you can
choose between heal or harm. Once you
choose, you can’t change your choice short
of an ethical shift or divine intervention.
Healing Font: You gain additional spell
slots each day at your highest level of cleric spell slots.
You can prepare only heal spells (page 343) in these
slots, and the number of slots is equal to 1 plus your
Charisma modifier.
Harmful Font: You gain additional spell slots each
day at your highest level of cleric spell slots. You can
prepare only harm spells (page 343) in these slots,
and the number of slots is equal to 1 plus your
Charisma modifier.
Doctrine
Even among followers of the same deity, there
are numerous doctrines and beliefs, which
sometimes vary wildly between clerics. At 1st
level, you select a doctrine and gain the benefits
of its first doctrine. The doctrines presented in
this book are cloistered cleric and warpriest.
Each doctrine grants you initial benefits
at 1st level. At 3rd, 7th, 11th, 15th, and
19th levels, you gain the benefits granted by your
doctrine’s second, third, fourth, fifth, and final
doctrines respectively.
Cloistered Cleric
You are a cleric of the cloth, focusing on divine magic and
your connection to your deity’s domains.
First Doctrine (1st): You gain the Domain Initiate cleric
feat (page 121).
Second Doctrine (3rd): Your proficiency rank for
Fortitude saves increases to expert.
Third Doctrine (7th): Your proficiency ranks for divine
spell attack rolls and spell DCs increase to expert.
Fourth Doctrine (11th): You gain expert proficiency
with your deity’s favored weapon. When you
critically succeed at an attack roll
using that weapon, you apply
the weapon’s critical specialization
effect; use your divine spell DC
if necessary.
119
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Cleric Feats 2nd
At 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a cleric
class feat. These begin on page 121.
Skill Feats 2nd
At 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a
skill feat. Skill feats can be found in Chapter 5 and
have the skill trait. You must be trained or better in the
corresponding skill to select a skill feat.
General Feats 3rd
At 3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter, you gain a
general feat. General feats are listed in Chapter 5.
Skill Increases 3rd
At 3rd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a
skill increase. You can use this increase to either become
trained in one skill you’re untrained in, or become an
expert in one skill in which you’re already trained.
You can use any of these skill increases you gain at
7th level or higher to become a master in a skill in which
you’re already an expert, and any of these skill increases
you gain at 15th level or higher to become legendary in a
skill in which you’re already a master.
Ability Boosts 5th
At 5th level and every 5 levels thereafter, you boost four
different ability scores. You can use these ability boosts to
increase your ability scores above 18. Boosting an ability
Fifth Doctrine (15th): Your proficiency ranks for divine
spell attack rolls and spell DCs increase to master.
Final Doctrine (19th): Your proficiency ranks for divine
spell attack rolls and spell DCs increase to legendary.
Warpriest
You have trained in the more militant doctrine of your
church, focusing on both spells and battle.
First Doctrine (1st): You’re trained in light and medium
armor, and you have expert proficiency in Fortitude saves.
You gain the Shield Block general feat (page 266), a reaction
to reduce damage with a shield. If your deity’s weapon is
simple, you gain the Deadly Simplicity cleric feat (page 121).
At 13th level, if you gain the divine defense class feature,
you also gain expert proficiency in light and medium armor.
Second Doctrine (3rd): You’re trained in martial weapons.
Third Doctrine (7th): You gain expert proficiency
with your deity’s favored weapon. When you critically
succeed at an attack roll using that weapon, you apply
the weapon’s critical specialization effect; use your divine
spell DC if necessary.
Fourth Doctrine (11th Level): Your proficiency ranks for
divine spell attack rolls and spell DCs increase to expert.
Fifth Doctrine (15th Level): Your proficiency rank
for Fortitude saves increases to master. When you
roll a success at a Fortitude save, you get a critical
success instead.
Final Doctrine (19th Level): Your proficiency ranks for
divine spell attack rolls and spell DCs increase to master.
TABLE 3–9: CLERIC SPELLS PER DAY
Your Spell Level
Level Cantrips 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th
1 5 2* — — — — — — — — —
2 5 3* — — — — — — — — —
3 5 3 2* — — — — — — — —
4 5 3 3* — — — — — — — —
5 5 3 3 2* — — — — — — —
6 5 3 3 3* — — — — — — —
7 5 3 3 3 2* — — — — — —
8 5 3 3 3 3* — — — — — —
9 5 3 3 3 3 2* — — — — —
10 5 3 3 3 3 3* — — — — —
11 5 3 3 3 3 3 2* — — — —
12 5 3 3 3 3 3 3* — — — —
13 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 2* — — —
14 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 3* — — —
15 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 2* — —
16 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3* — —
17 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 2* —
18 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3* —
19 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 1*†
20 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 1*†
* Your divine font gives you additional heal or harm spells of this level. The number is equal to 1 + your Charisma modifier.
† The miraculous spell class feature gives you a 10th-level spell slot that works a bit differently from other spell slots.
Core Rulebook
120
score increases it by 1 if it’s already 18 or above, or by 2
if it starts out below 18.
Alertness 5th
You remain alert to threats around you. Your proficiency
rank for Perception increases to expert.
Ancestry Feats 5th
In addition to the ancestry feat you started with, you gain
an ancestry feat at 5th level and every 4 levels thereafter.
The list of ancestry feats available to you can be found in
your ancestry’s entry in Chapter 2.
Resolve 9th
You’ve steeled your mind with resolve. Your proficiency
rank for Will saves increases to master. When you roll a
success at a Will save, you get a critical success instead.
Lightning Reflexes 11th
Your reflexes are lightning fast. Your proficiency rank for
Reflex saves increases to expert.
Divine Defense 13th
Your training and your deity protect you from harm. Your
proficiency rank in unarmored defense increases to expert.
Weapon Specialization 13th
You’ve learned how to inflict greater injuries with the
weapons you know best. You deal 2 additional damage
with weapons and unarmed attacks in which you are an
expert. This damage increases to 3 if you’re a master, and to
4 if you’re legendary.
Miraculous Spell 19th
You’re exalted by your deity and gain truly incredible
spells. You gain a single 10th-level spell slot and can
prepare a spell in that slot using divine spellcasting.
You don’t gain more 10th-level spells as you level up,
though you can take the Maker of Miracles feat to gain
a second slot.
Cleric Feats
At each level that you gain a cleric feat, you can select one
of the following feats. You must satisfy any prerequisites
before selecting the feat.
1ST LEVEL
DEADLY SIMPLICITY FEAT 1
CLERIC
Prerequisites deity with a simple favored weapon, trained
with your deity’s favored weapon
Your deity’s weapon is especially powerful in your hands.
When you are wielding your deity’s favored weapon, increase
the damage die size of that weapon by one step.
If your deity’s favored weapon is an unarmed attack (such
as a fist, if you worship Irori) and its damage die is smaller
than d6, instead increase its damage die size to d6.
DOMAIN INITIATE FEAT 1
CLERIC
Your deity bestows a special spell related to their powers.
Select one domain—a subject of particular interest to you
within your religion—from your deity’s list. You gain an initial
domain spell for that domain, a spell unique to the domain
and not available to other clerics. Each domain’s theme and
domain spells appear in Table 8–2: Domains on page 441.
Domain spells are a type of focus spell. It costs 1 Focus
Point to cast a focus spell, and you start with a focus pool
of 1 Focus Point. You refill your focus pool during your daily
preparations, and you can regain 1 Focus Point by spending 10
minutes using the Refocus activity to pray to your deity or do
service toward their causes.
Focus spells are automatically heightened to half your
level rounded up. Focus spells don’t require spell slots, nor
can you cast them using spell slots. Certain feats can give you
more focus spells and increase the size of your focus pool,
though your focus pool can never hold more than 3 Focus
Points. The full rules for focus spells appear on page 300.
Special You can select this feat multiple times, selecting a
different domain each time and gaining its domain spell.
HARMING HANDS FEAT 1
CLERIC
Prerequisites harmful font
The mordant power of your negative energy grows. When you
cast harm, you roll d10s instead of d8s.
HEALING HANDS FEAT 1
CLERIC
Prerequisites healing font
Your positive energy is even more vibrant and restorative.
When you cast heal, you roll d10s instead of d8s.
HOLY CASTIGATION FEAT 1
CLERIC
Prerequisites good alignment
You combine holy energy with positive energy to damage
demons, devils, and their evil ilk. Heal spells you cast damage
fiends as though they were undead.
KEY TERMS
You’ll see the following term in many cleric class features.
Metamagic: These actions tweak your spells. You must
use a metamagic action directly before Casting the Spell
you want to alter. If you use any action (including free
actions and reactions) other than Cast a Spell directly
after, you waste the benefits of the metamagic action.
Effects added by a metamagic action are part of the
spell’s effect, not of the metamagic action.
121
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
REACH SPELL [one-action] FEAT 1
CLERIC CONCENTRATE METAMAGIC
You can extend the range of your spells. If the next action you use is to Cast a Spell that has
a range, increase that spell’s range by 30 feet. As is standard for increasing spell ranges, if
the spell normally has a range of touch, you extend its range to 30 feet.
2ND LEVEL
CANTRIP EXPANSION FEAT 2
CLERIC
You study a wider range of simple spells. You can prepare two additional cantrips each day.
COMMUNAL HEALING FEAT 2
CLERIC HEALING POSITIVE
You’re a conduit for positive energy, and as you channel it through you, it heals some of your
minor injuries. When you cast the heal spell to heal a single creature other than yourself,
you regain Hit Points equal to the spell level of the heal spell.
EMBLAZON ARMAMENT FEAT 2
CLERIC EXPLORATION
Carefully etching a sacred image into a physical object, you steel yourself for battle. You
can spend 10 minutes emblazoning a symbol of your deity upon a weapon or shield. The
symbol doesn’t fade until 1 year has passed, but if you Emblazon an Armament, any symbol
you previously emblazoned and any symbol already emblazoned on that item instantly
disappears. The item becomes a religious symbol of your deity and can be used as a divine
focus while emblazoned, and it gains another benefit determined by the type of item. This
benefit applies only to followers of the deity the symbol represents.
• Shield The shield gains a +1 status bonus to its Hardness. (This causes it to reduce
more damage with the Shield Block reaction.)
• Weapon The wielder gains a +1 status bonus to damage rolls.
SAP LIFE FEAT 2
CLERIC HEALING
You draw the life force out of your enemies to heal your own wounds. When you cast a
harm spell and damage at least one living creature, you regain Hit Points equal to the spell
level of your harm spell. If you aren’t a living creature, you gain no benefit from this feat.
TURN UNDEAD FEAT 2
CLERIC
Undead harmed by your positive energy might flee, compelled by an innate aversion to the
force opposite undeath. When you use a heal spell to damage undead, each undead of your
level or lower that critically fails its save gains the fleeing condition for 1 round.
VERSATILE FONT FEAT 2
CLERIC
Prerequisites harmful font or healing font, deity that allows clerics to have both fonts
As you explore your deity’s aspects, you move beyond restrictions on healing or harming. You
can prepare either harm or heal in the spell slots gained from the harmful font or healing font.
4TH LEVEL
CHANNEL SMITE [two-actions] FEAT 4
CLERIC DIVINE NECROMANCY
Prerequisites harmful font or healing font
Cost Expend a harm or heal spell.
You siphon the destructive energies of positive or negative energy through a melee attack and
CLERIC FEATS
If you need to look up a cleric
feat by name instead of by level,
use this table.
Feat Level
Advanced Domain 8
Align Armament 8
Avatar’s Audience 20
Cantrip Expansion 2
Cast Down 6
Castigating Weapon 10
Channel Smite 4
Channeled Succor 8
Command Undead 4
Communal Healing 2
Cremate Undead 8
Deadly Simplicity 1
Defensive Recovery 12
Deity’s Protection 14
Directed Channel 4
Divine Weapon 6
Domain Focus 12
Domain Initiate 1
Domain Wellspring 16
Echoing Channel 18
Emblazon Antimagic 12
Emblazon Armament 2
Emblazon Energy 8
Eternal Bane 16
Eternal Blessing 16
Extend Armament Alignment 14
Fast Channel 14
Harming Hands 1
Healing Hands 1
Heroic Recovery 10
Holy Castigation 1
Improved Command Undead 10
Improved Communal Healing 4
Improved Swift Banishment 18
Maker of Miracles 20
Metamagic Channel 20
Necrotic Infusion 4
Reach Spell 1
Replenishment of War 10
Resurrectionist 16
Sap Life 2
Selective Energy 6
Shared Replenishment 12
Steady Spellcasting 6
Swift Banishment 14
Turn Undead 2
Versatile Font 2
Core Rulebook
122
into your foe. Make a melee Strike and add the spell’s damage
to the Strike’s damage. This is negative damage if you expended
a harm spell or positive damage if you expended a heal spell.
The spell is expended with no effect if your Strike fails or
hits a creature that isn’t damaged by that energy type (such as
if you hit a non-undead creature with a heal spell).
COMMAND UNDEAD [one-action] FEAT 4
CLERIC CONCENTRATE METAMAGIC
Prerequisites harmful font, evil alignment
You grasp the animating force within an undead creature and
bend it to your will. If the next action you use is to cast harm
targeting one undead creature, you transform the effects of
that harm spell. Instead of harm’s normal effects, the target
becomes controlled by you if its level is equal to or lower than
your level – 3. It can attempt a Will saving throw to resist being
controlled by you. If the target is already under someone else’s
command, the controlling creature also rolls a saving throw,
and the undead uses the better result.
Critical Success The target is unaffected and is temporarily
immune for 24 hours.
Success The target is unaffected.
Failure The undead creature becomes a minion under your
control. The spell gains a duration of 1 minute, but it is
dismissed if you or an ally attacks the minion undead.
Critical Failure As failure, but the duration is 1 hour.
DIRECTED CHANNEL FEAT 4
CLERIC
You can shape the energy you channel in a single direction,
reaching farther and in a more directed fashion. When you
cast a version of harm or heal that has an area, you can make
its area a 60-foot cone instead of a 30-foot emanation.
IMPROVED COMMUNAL HEALING FEAT 4
CLERIC
Prerequisites Communal Healing
You can direct excess channeled energy outward to benefit
an ally. You can grant the Hit Points you would regain from
Communal Healing to any one creature within the range of
your heal spell instead of yourself. You can also use Communal
Healing when you target only yourself with a heal spell,
though if you do, you must grant the additional healing to
someone other than yourself.
NECROTIC INFUSION [one-action] FEAT 4
CLERIC CONCENTRATE METAMAGIC
Prerequisites harmful font, evil alignment
You pour negative energy into your undead subject to
empower its attacks. If the next action you use is to cast harm
to restore Hit Points to a single undead creature, the target
then deals an additional 1d6 negative damage with its melee
weapons and unarmed attacks until the end of its next turn.
If the harm spell is at least 5th level, this damage increases
to 2d6, and if the harm spell is at least 8th level, the damage
increases to 3d6.
6TH LEVEL
CAST DOWN [one-action] FEAT 6
CLERIC CONCENTRATE METAMAGIC
Prerequisites harmful font or healing font
The sheer force of your faith can bring a foe crashing down. If
the next action you use is to cast harm or heal to damage one
creature, the target is knocked prone if it takes any damage from
the spell. If the target critically fails its save against the spell, it
also takes a –10-foot status penalty to its Speed for 1 minute.
DIVINE WEAPON [free-action] FEAT 6
CLERIC
Frequency once per turn
Trigger You finish Casting a Spell using one of your divine
spell slots on your turn.
You siphon residual spell energy into a weapon you’re
wielding. Until the end of your turn, the weapon deals an
additional 1d4 force damage. You can instead deal an additional
1d6 damage of an alignment type that matches one of your
deity’s alignment components. As usual for aligned damage,
this can damage only creatures of the opposite alignment.
SELECTIVE ENERGY FEAT 6
CLERIC
As you call down divine power, you can prevent some enemies
from benefiting or some allies from being hurt. When you cast
a version of harm or heal that has an area, you can designate
a number of creatures equal to your Charisma modifier
(minimum 1) that are not targeted by the spell.
STEADY SPELLCASTING FEAT 6
CLERIC
Confident in your technique, you don’t lose spells easily. If a
reaction would disrupt your spellcasting action, attempt a DC
15 flat check. If you succeed, your action isn’t disrupted.
8TH LEVEL
ADVANCED DOMAIN FEAT 8
CLERIC
Prerequisites Domain Initiate
Your studies or prayers have unlocked deeper secrets of your
deity’s domain. You gain an advanced domain spell from one
CONTROLLING UNDEAD
Controlled undead gain the minion trait. Minions can use 2
actions per turn and can’t use reactions. A minion acts on your
turn in combat when you spend an action to issue it verbal
commands (this action has the auditory and concentrate
traits). If given no commands, undead minions use no actions
except to defend themselves or to escape obvious harm.
If left unattended for at least 1 minute, mindless undead
minions don’t act, and intelligent ones act as they please. You
can’t have more than four undead minions at a time.
123
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SAMPLE CLERIC
GOZREN
Following the Wind and the Waves, you protect the
beauty of nature in all its forms.
ABILITY SCORES
Prioritize Wisdom and Strength. Charisma increases your
divine font heal spells.
SKILLS
Athletics, Nature, Religion, Survival
DEITY
Gozreh (alignment: LN; divine font: heal)
DOCTRINE
Warpriest
HIGHER-LEVEL FEATS
Domain Initiate (water, 1st), Divine Weapon (6th)
PREPARED SPELLS
1st gust of wind, sanctuary, heal spells from divine font;
Cantrips detect magic, know direction, light, message, shield
of your domains (as listed in Table 8–2: Domains on page 441).
Increase the number of Focus Points in your focus pool by 1.
Special You can select this feat multiple times. Each time,
you must select a different advanced domain spell from a
domain for which you have an initial domain spell.
ALIGN ARMAMENT [one-action] FEAT 8
CLERIC DIVINE EVOCATION
Prerequisites chaotic, evil, good, or lawful deity
Frequency once per round
You bring a weapon into metaphysical concordance with your
deity’s beliefs. When you select this feat, choose chaotic, evil,
good, or lawful. Your choice must match one of your deity’s
alignment components. This action has the trait corresponding
to the chosen alignment component.
When you use this action, you touch a weapon. For 1
round, that weapon deals an additional 1d6 damage of the
chosen type to creatures of the opposed alignment. For
example, if you chose good, the weapon would deal
an extra 1d6 good damage to evil creatures. If you
Align an Armament again, any previously aligned
armament loses its additional damage.
Special You can select this feat a second time,
choosing your deity’s other alignment component.
When you Align an Armament, you can choose either
alignment component.
CHANNELED SUCCOR FEAT 8
CLERIC
Prerequisites healing font
You can remove conditions with divine grace. You can sacrifice
one heal spell you’ve prepared in your extra slots from healing
font to cast one of the following spells instead: remove curse,
remove disease, remove paralysis, or restoration. The spell is
heightened to the same level as the heal spell you sacrificed.
CREMATE UNDEAD FEAT 8
CLERIC
Your positive energy sets undead alight. When you use a heal
spell to damage undead, each undead that takes damage also
takes persistent fire damage equal to the spell’s level.
EMBLAZON ENERGY FEAT 8
CLERIC
Prerequisites Emblazon Armament
With elemental forces, you make your emblazoned symbols
more potent. When you Emblazon an Armament, you can choose
from the following effects instead of the effects listed in that feat.
These effects have the same restrictions as the base options.
• Shield Choose acid, cold, electricity, fire, or sonic.
The wielder gain the shield’s circumstance bonus to
saving throws against that damage type and can use
Shield Block against damage of that type. The shield
also gains resistance to that damage type equal to
half your level if you have a domain spell with a trait
matching that type (such as fire).
Core Rulebook
124
• Weapon Choose acid, cold, electricity, fire, or sonic.
The weapon deals an extra 1d4 damage of that type.
Increase this extra damage to 1d6 if you have a domain
spell with a trait matching that type (such as fire).
10TH LEVEL
CASTIGATING WEAPON FEAT 10
CLERIC
Prerequisites Holy Castigation
The force of your deity’s castigation strengthens your body so
you can strike down the wicked. After you damage a fiend using
a heal spell, your weapon or unarmed Strikes deal extra good
damage to fiends equal to half the level of the heal spell until
the end of your next turn. This is cumulative with any good
damage the weapon already deals (such as from a holy rune).
HEROIC RECOVERY [one-action] FEAT 10
CLERIC CONCENTRATE METAMAGIC
Prerequisites healing font, good alignment
The restorative power of your healing invigorates the
recipient. If the next action you use is to cast heal targeting
a single living creature and the target regains Hit Points from
the spell, it also gains three bonuses until the end of its next
turn: a +5-foot status bonus to its Speed, a +1 status bonus to
attack rolls, and a +1 status bonus to damage rolls.
IMPROVED COMMAND UNDEAD FEAT 10
CLERIC
Prerequisites harmful font, Command Undead, evil alignment
Undead creatures find it all but impossible to resist your
commands. When you use Command Undead, if the undead
succeeds at its save but doesn’t critically succeed, it is your
minion for 1 round. If the undead fails its save, it is your
minion for 10 minutes. If it critically fails, it is your minion for
24 hours.
REPLENISHMENT OF WAR FEAT 10
CLERIC
Prerequisites expert in your deity’s favored weapon
Striking out against your enemies draws praise and protection
from your deity. When you damage a creature with a Strike
using your deity’s favored weapon, you gain a number of
temporary Hit Points equal to half your level, or equal to your
level if the Strike was a critical hit. These temporary Hit Points
last until the start of your next turn.
12TH LEVEL
DEFENSIVE RECOVERY [one-action] FEAT 12
CLERIC CONCENTRATE METAMAGIC
Prerequisites harmful font or healing font
Your faith provides temporary protection in addition to healing.
If the next action you use is to cast harm or heal on a single
target and the target regains Hit Points from the spell, it also
gains a +2 status bonus to AC and saving throws for 1 round.
DOMAIN FOCUS FEAT 12
CLERIC
Prerequisites one or more domain spells
Your devotion to your deity’s domains grows greater, and so
does the power granted to you. If you have spent at least 2
Focus Points since the last time you Refocused, you recover 2
Focus Points when you Refocus instead of 1.
EMBLAZON ANTIMAGIC FEAT 12
CLERIC
Prerequisites Emblazon Armament
Your deity’s symbol protects against offensive magic. When
you Emblazon an Armament, you can choose from the
following effects instead of the effects listed in that feat.
These effects have the same restrictions as the base options.
• Shield When the wielder has the shield raised, they
gain the shield’s circumstance bonus to saving throws
against magic, and they can use Shield Block against
damage from their enemies’ spells.
• Weapon When the weapon’s wielder critically hits
with the weapon, they can attempt to counteract a
spell on their target, using their level as the counteract
level. If they attempt to do so, the emblazoned symbol
immediately disappears.
SHARED REPLENISHMENT FEAT 12
CLERIC
Prerequisites Replenishment of War
When your deity blesses your warlike acts, you can extend
that favor to your allies. You can grant the temporary Hit Points
from Replenishment of War to an ally within 10 feet instead
of gaining them yourself. You can grant these temporary Hit
Points to a different ally each time, meaning you might be able
to grant them to multiple creatures in a single turn.
14TH LEVEL
DEITY’S PROTECTION FEAT 14
CLERIC
Prerequisites Advanced Domain
When you call upon your deity’s power to fulfill the promise
of their domain, you gain divine protection. After you cast a
domain spell, you gain resistance to all damage until the start
of your next turn. The amount of resistance is equal to the
level of the domain spell you cast.
EXTEND ARMAMENT ALIGNMENT FEAT 14
CLERIC
Prerequisites Align Armament
The alignment you impose on a weapon lasts much longer. The
duration of Align Armament increases to 1 minute.
FAST CHANNEL FEAT 14
CLERIC
Prerequisites harmful font or healing font
Divine power is always at your fingertips, swiftly responding
125
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SAMPLE CLERIC to your call. When you cast harm or heal by spending 2
actions, you can get the effects of the 3-action version instead
of the 2-action version.
You can do this with harm if you have harmful font or heal
if you have healing font (or both if you have Versatile Font).
SWIFT BANISHMENT [reaction] FEAT 14
CLERIC
Trigger You critically hit a creature that is not on its
home plane.
Requirements You have a banishment spell prepared.
The force of your blow sends your victim back to its home
plane. You expend a banishment spell you have prepared,
affecting the creature you critically hit without needing to
cast the spell. The creature can attempt to resist the spell
as normal.
16TH LEVEL
ETERNAL BANE FEAT 16
CLERIC
Prerequisites evil alignment
A life of evil has made you a nexus for your deity’s vile power.
You’re continuously surrounded by a bane spell with a spell
level equal to half your level (rounded up). The radius is 15
feet, and you can’t increase it. You can Dismiss the spell; if you
do, it returns automatically after 1 minute.
ETERNAL BLESSING FEAT 16
CLERIC
Prerequisites good alignment
Your good deeds have brought your deity’s grace to you for
all of eternity. You’re continuously surrounded by a bless
spell with a spell level equal to half your level (rounded
up). The radius is 15 feet, and you can’t increase it. You can
Dismiss the spell; if you do, it returns automatically after
1 minute.
RESURRECTIONIST FEAT 16
CLERIC
You can cause a creature you bring back from the brink of
death to thrive and continue healing. When you restore Hit
Points to a dying creature or bring a dead creature back to
life and restore Hit Points to it, you grant that creature fast
healing 5 for 1 minute. This fast healing ends if the creature is
knocked unconscious.
18TH LEVEL
DOMAIN WELLSPRING FEAT 18
CLERIC
Prerequisites Domain Focus
The intensity of your focus grows from the investment you’ve
placed in your domains. If you have spent at least 3 Focus
Points since the last time you Refocused, you recover 3 Focus
Points when you Refocus instead of 1.
PHARASMIN
A follower of the Lady of Graves, you respect the
sanctity of both life and death.
ABILITY SCORES
Prioritize Wisdom, with Charisma second to maximize
your healing and help you spread the word of your faith.
SKILLS
Diplomacy, Medicine, Occultism, Religion
DEITY
Pharasma (alignment: N; divine font: heal)
DOCTRINE
Cloistered cleric (death domain)
HIGHER-LEVEL FEATS
Turn Undead (2nd), Selective Energy (6th)
PREPARED SPELLS
1st fear, mindlink, heal spells from divine font; Cantrips
detect magic,disrupt undead, daze, light, stabilize
Core Rulebook
126
ECHOING CHANNEL [one-action] FEAT 18
CLERIC CONCENTRATE METAMAGIC
When you pull forth positive or negative energy, you also
create a smaller pocket of that energy. If the next action you
use is to cast a 2-action harm or heal to heal or damage a single
creature, choose one additional creature adjacent to either
you or the target. Target that creature with a 1-action version
of the same spell. This spell is the same level as the 2-action
harm or heal you cast and doesn’t cost another spell slot.
IMPROVED SWIFT BANISHMENT FEAT 18
CLERIC
Prerequisites Swift Banishment
You easily banish creatures with your weapon. You can use
Swift Banishment as long as you have a spell slot of 5th level or
higher remaining, even if you don’t have banishment prepared.
You must sacrifice a prepared spell of 5th level or higher, and the
banishment effect you create is heightened to the level of that
spell. Your weapon serves as the special material component
of banishment, causing the target to take the –2 penalty to its
save against any banishment you cast using Swift Banishment.
20TH LEVEL
AVATAR’S AUDIENCE FEAT 20
CLERIC
Your extensive service has made you a lesser herald of your
deity, which affords you certain privileges. First, any creature
you encounter knows instinctively that you speak for
your deity. Second, if you conduct the commune ritual to
contact your deity, you don’t have to pay any cost and you
automatically get a critical success. Third, once per day, you
can cast plane shift as a divine innate spell, but only to travel
to the realm of your deity. When you cast it this way, its
casting time is 1 minute, your religious symbol is a sufficient
tuning fork for this spell, and you appear exactly where you
want to be. If you’re in your deity’s realm due to this spell, you
can return to the point you left when you cast it by spending
a single action, which has the concentrate and divine traits.
MAKER OF MIRACLES FEAT 20
CLERIC
Prerequisites miraculous spell
You are a conduit for truly deific power. You gain an additional
10th-level spell slot.
METAMAGIC CHANNEL [free-action] FEAT 20
CLERIC CONCENTRATE
Deep understanding of divine revelations into the nature of
vital essence allows you to freely manipulate the effects of
your positive or negative energy. Use 1 metamagic action
that you can perform that normally takes 1 action and can be
applied to the harm or heal spell. If you use it in this way, its
effects apply only to a harm or heal spell.
127
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Core Rulebook
128
The power of nature is impossible to resist. It can bring ruin to the stoutest
fortress in minutes, reducing even the mightiest works to rubble, burning them
to ash, burying them beneath an avalanche of snow, or drowning them beneath
the waves. It can provide endless bounty and breathtaking splendor to those who respect it—
and an agonizing death to those who take it too lightly. You are one of those who hear nature’s
call. You stand in awe of the majesty of its power and give yourself over to its service.
During combat encounters...
You call upon the forces of nature to defeat your enemies and protect your allies.
You cast spells that draw upon primal magic to protect yourself and your friends,
heal their wounds, or summon deadly animals to fight at your side. Depending on
your bond to nature, you might call upon powerful elemental magic or change shape
into a terrifying beast.
During social encounters...
You represent balance and a reasoned approach to problems, looking for solutions
that not only are best for the natural world, but also allow the creatures within it to
live in harmony and peace. You often propose compromises that allow both sides to
gain what they truly need, even if they can’t have all that they desire.
While exploring...
Your nature skills are invaluable. You track down enemies, navigate the wilderness,
and use spells to detect magical auras around you. You might even ask wild animals
to lend their extraordinary senses and scouting abilities to your group.
In downtime...
You might craft magic items or potions. Alternatively, your tie to nature might lead
you to tend a wilderness area, befriending beasts and healing the wounds caused by
civilization. You might even teach sustainable farming and animal husbandry techniques
that allow others to subsist off the land without harming the natural balance.
You Might...
• Have a deep and meaningful respect for the power of nature.
• Be in constant awe of the natural world, eager to share it with others but wary of
their influence upon it.
• Treat plants and animals as allies, working with them to reach your goals.
Others Probably...
• View you as a representative of nature, and are sure you can control it.
• Assume you’re a recluse who avoids society and cities and prefers to live in the wild.
• Consider you a mystic, similar to a priest, but answering only to the forces of nature.
INITIAL PROFICIENCIES
At 1st level, you gain the
listed proficiency ranks in
the following statistics. You
are untrained in anything
not listed unless you gain a
better proficiency rank in some
other way.
PERCEPTION
Trained in Perception
SAVING THROWS
Trained in Fortitude
Trained in Reflex
Expert in Will
SKILLS
Trained in Nature
Trained in one skill determined
by your druidic order
Trained in a number of
additional skills equal to 2 plus
your Intelligence modifier
ATTACKS
Trained in simple weapons
Trained in unarmed attacks
DEFENSES
Trained in light armor
Trained in medium armor
Trained in unarmored defense
CLASS DC
Trained in druid class DC
SPELLS
Trained in primal spell attacks
Trained in primal spell DCs
Druid
HIT POINTS
8 plus your Constitution modifier
You increase your maximum number of
HP by this number at 1st level and every
level thereafter.
KEY ABILITY
WISDOM
At 1st level, your class gives you
an ability boost to Wisdom.
CLASSES 3
129
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Class Features
You gain these abilities as a druid. Abilities gained at
higher levels list the level at which you gain them next to
the features’ names.
Ancestry and Background
In addition to the abilities provided by your class at 1st
level, you have the benefits of your selected ancestry and
background, as described in Chapter 2.
Initial Proficiencies
At 1st level you gain a number of proficiencies,
representing your basic training. These proficiencies are
noted at the start of this class.
Primal Spellcasting
The power of the wild world flows through you. You can
cast primal spells using the Cast a Spell activity, and you
can supply material, somatic, and verbal components when
casting spells (see Casting Spells on page 302). Because
you’re a druid, you can usually hold a primal focus (such as
holly and mistletoe) for spells requiring material components
instead of needing to use a spell component pouch.
At 1st level, you can prepare two 1st-level spells and
five cantrips each morning from the common spells on
the primal spell list in this book (page 314), or from other
primal spells to which you gain access. Prepared spells
remain available to you until you cast them or until you
prepare your spells again. The number of spells you can
prepare is called your spell slots.
As you increase in level as a druid, the number of spells
you can prepare each day increases, as does the highest
level of spell you can cast, as shown in Table 3–11: Druid
Spells per Day on page 132.
Some of your spells require you to attempt a spell
attack roll to see how effective they are, or have
your enemies roll against your spell DC (typically by
attempting a saving throw). Since your key ability is
Wisdom, your spell attack rolls and spell DCs use your
Wisdom modifier. Details on calculating these statistics
appear on page 447.
Heightening Spells
When you gain spell slots of 2nd level and higher, you can
fill those slots with stronger versions of lower-level spells.
This increases the spell’s level, heightening it to match the
spell slot. Many spells have specific improvements when
they are heightened to certain levels.
Cantrips
A cantrip is a special type of spell that doesn’t use spell
slots. You can cast a cantrip at will, any number of times
per day. A cantrip is always automatically heightened
to half your level rounded up—this is usually equal to
the highest level of spell you can cast as a druid. For
example, as a 1st-level druid, your cantrips are 1st-level
spells, and as a 5th-level druid, your cantrips are 3rdlevel spells.
Anathema
As stewards of the natural order, druids find affronts
to nature anathema. If you perform enough acts that
are anathema to nature, you lose your magical abilities
that come from the druid class, including your primal
spellcasting and the benefits of your order. These abilities
can be regained only if you demonstrate your repentance
by conducting an atone ritual (page 409).
The following acts are anathema to all druids:
• Using metal armor or shields.
• Despoiling natural places.
• Teaching the Druidic language to non-druids.
Each druidic order also has additional anathema acts,
detailed in the order’s entry.
Druidic Language
You know Druidic, a secret language known to only
druids, in addition to any languages you know through
your ancestry. Druidic has its own alphabet. Teaching the
Druidic language to non-druids is anathema.
TABLE 3–10: DRUID ADVANCEMENT
Your
Level Class Features
1 Ancestry and background, initial proficiencies,
primal spellcasting, anathema, Druidic language,
druidic order, Shield Block, wild empathy
2 Druid feat, skill feat
3 2nd-level spells, alertness, general feat, great
fortitude, skill increase
4 Druid feat, skill feat
5 3rd-level spells, ability boosts, ancestry feat,
lightning reflexes, skill increase
6 Druid feat, skill feat
7 4th-level spells, expert spellcaster, general feat,
skill increase
8 Druid feat, skill feat
9 5th-level spells, ancestry feat, skill increase
10 Ability boosts, druid feat, skill feat
11 6th-level spells, druid weapon expertise, general
feat, resolve, skill increase
12 Druid feat, skill feat
13 7th-level spells, ancestry feat, medium armor
expertise, skill increase, weapon specialization
14 Druid feat, skill feat
15 8th-level spells, ability boosts, general feat, master
spellcaster, skill increase
16 Druid feat, skill feat
17 9th-level spells, ancestry feat, skill increase
18 Druid feat, skill feat
19 General feat, legendary spellcaster, skill increase
20 Ability boosts, druid feat, skill feat
Core Rulebook
130
Druidic Order
Upon becoming a druid, you align yourself with a druidic
order, which grants you a class feat, an order spell
(see below), and an additional trained skill tied to your
order. While you’ll always be a member of your initial
order, it’s not unheard of for a druid to request to study
with other orders in search of greater understanding of
the natural world, and PC druids are among the most
likely to blend the powers of different orders.
Order spells are a type of focus spell. It costs 1 Focus
Point to cast a focus spell, and you start with a focus
pool of 1 Focus Point. You refill your focus pool during
your daily preparations, and you can regain 1 Focus
Point by spending 10 minutes using the Refocus activity
to commune with local nature spirits or otherwise tend to
the wilderness in a way befitting your order.
Focus spells are automatically heightened to half your
level rounded up, much like cantrips. Focus spells don’t
require spell slots to cast, and you can’t cast them using
spell slots. Selecting druid feats can give you more focus
spells and increase the size of your focus pool, though
your focus pool can never hold more than 3 points.
The full rules for focus spells appear in Chapter 7 on
page 300.
Animal
You have a strong connection to beasts, and you are allied
with a beast companion. You are trained in Athletics.
You also gain the Animal Companion druid feat. You
gain the heal animal order spell. Committing wanton
cruelty to animals or killing animals unnecessarily
is anathema to your order. (This doesn’t prevent you
from defending yourself against animals or killing them
cleanly for food.)
Leaf
You revere plants and the bounty of nature, acting as
both a gardener and warden for the wilderness, teaching
sustainable techniques to communities, and helping
areas regrow after disasters or negligent humanoid
expansion. You are trained in Diplomacy. You also gain
the Leshy Familiar druid feat. You gain the goodberry
order spell, and you increase the number of Focus
Points in your focus pool by 1. Committing wanton
cruelty to plants or killing plants unnecessarily is
anathema to your order. (This doesn’t
prevent you from defending yourself
against plants or harvesting them
when necessary for survival.)
131
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Wild Empathy
You have a connection to the creatures of the natural
world that allows you to communicate with them on a
rudimentary level. You can use Diplomacy to Make an
Impression on animals and to make very simple Requests
of them. In most cases, wild animals will give you time to
make your case.
Druid Feats 2nd
At 2nd level and every even-numbered level, you gain a
druid class feat.
Skill Feats 2nd
At 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a skill
feat. Skill feats appear in Chapter 5 and have the skill
trait. You must be trained or better in the corresponding
skill to select a skill feat.
Alertness 3rd
Experience has made you increasingly aware of threats
around you, and you react more quickly to danger.
Your proficiency rank for Perception increases to expert.
General Feats 3rd
At 3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter, you gain a
general feat. General feats are listed in Chapter 5.
Great Fortitude 3rd
Your physique is incredibly hardy. Your proficiency rank
for Fortitude saves increases to expert.
TABLE 3–11: DRUID SPELLS PER DAY
Your Spell Level
Level Cantrips 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th
1 4 2 — — — — — — — — —
2 4 3 — — — — — — — — —
3 4 3 2 — — — — — — — —
4 4 3 3 — — — — — — — —
5 4 3 3 2 — — — — — — —
6 4 3 3 3 — — — — — — —
7 4 3 3 3 2 — — — — — —
8 4 3 3 3 3 — — — — — —
9 4 3 3 3 3 2 — — — — —
10 4 3 3 3 3 3 — — — — —
11 4 3 3 3 3 3 2 — — — —
12 4 3 3 3 3 3 3 — — — —
13 4 3 3 3 3 3 3 2 — — —
14 4 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 — — —
15 4 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 2 — —
16 4 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 — —
17 4 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 2 —
18 4 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 —
19 4 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 1*
20 4 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 1*
* The primal hierophant class feature gives you a 10th-level spell slot that works a bit differently from other spell slots.
Storm
You carry the fury of the storm within you, channeling
it to terrifying effect and riding the winds through the
sky. You are trained in Acrobatics. You also gain the
Storm Born druid feat. You gain the tempest surge order
spell, and you increase the number of Focus Points in
your focus pool by 1. Polluting the air or allowing those
who cause major air pollution or climate shifts to go
unpunished is anathema to your order. (This doesn’t
force you to take action against merely potential harm
to the environment or to sacrifice yourself against an
obviously superior foe.)
Wild
The savage, uncontrollable call of the natural world
infuses you, granting you the ability to change your
shape and take on the ferocious form of a wild creature.
You are trained in Intimidation. You also gain the
Wild Shape druid feat. You gain the wild morph order
spell. Becoming fully domesticated by the temptations
of civilization is anathema to your order. (This doesn’t
prevent you from buying and using processed goods or
staying in a city for an adventure, but you can never come
to rely on these conveniences or truly call such a place
your permanent home.)
Shield Block
You gain the Shield Block general feat (found on page
266), a reaction that lets you reduce damage with
your shield.
Core Rulebook
132
Skill Increases 3rd
At 3rd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a skill
increase. You can use this increase either to increase your
proficiency rank to trained in one skill you’re untrained
in, or to increase your proficiency rank in one skill in
which you’re already trained to expert.
At 7th level, you can use skill increases to increase
your proficiency rank to master in a skill in which you’re
already an expert, and at 15th level, you can use them to
increase your proficiency rank to legendary in a skill in
which you’re already a master.
Ability Boosts 5th
At 5th level and every 5 levels thereafter, you boost four
different ability scores. You can use these ability boosts to
increase your ability scores above 18. Boosting an ability
score increases it by 1 if it’s already 18 or above, or by 2
if it starts out below 18.
Ancestry Feats 5th
In addition to the ancestry feat you started with, you gain
an ancestry feat at 5th level and every 4 levels thereafter.
The list of ancestry feats available to you can be found in
your ancestry’s entry in Chapter 2.
Lightning Reflexes 5th
Your reflexes are lightning fast. Your proficiency rank for
Reflex saves increases to expert.
Expert Spellcaster 7th
Your command of primal forces has deepened, empowering
your spells. Your proficiency ranks for primal spell attack
rolls and spell DCs increase to expert.
Druid Weapon Expertise 11th
You have become thoroughly familiar with the weapons
of your trade. Your proficiency ranks for all simple
weapons and unarmed attacks increase to expert.
Resolve 11th
You’ve steeled your mind with incredible resolve. Your
proficiency rank for Will saves increases to master.
When you roll a success at a Will save, you get a
critical success instead.
Medium Armor Expertise 13th
You’ve learned to defend yourself better against attacks.
Your proficiency ranks for light armor, medium armor,
and unarmored defense increase to expert.
Weapon Specialization 13th
You’ve learned how to inflict greater injuries with the
weapons you know best. You deal 2 additional damage with
weapons and unarmed attacks in which you are an expert.
This damage increases to 3 if you’re a master, and to 4 if
you’re legendary.
Master Spellcaster 15th
Primal magic answers your command. Your proficiency
ranks for primal spell attack rolls and spell DCs increase
to master.
Legendary Spellcaster 19th
You have developed an unparalleled rapport with the
magic of nature. Your proficiency ranks for primal spell
attack rolls and spell DCs increase to legendary.
Primal Hierophant 19th
You command the most potent forces of primal magic
and can cast a spell of truly incredible power. You gain
a single 10th-level spell slot and can prepare a spell in
that slot using primal spellcasting. Unlike with other spell
slots, you don’t gain more 10th-level spells as you level
up, though you can take the Hierophant’s Power feat to
gain a second slot.
Druid Feats
At every level that you gain a druid feat, you can select one
of the following feats. You must satisfy any prerequisites
before selecting the feat.
1ST LEVEL
ANIMAL COMPANION FEAT 1
DRUID
Prerequisites animal order
You gain the service of a young animal companion that
travels with you on your adventures and obeys any simple
commands you give it to the best of its abilities. See Animal
Companions on page 214 for more information.
LESHY FAMILIAR FEAT 1
DRUID
Prerequisites leaf order
You gain a leshy familiar, a Tiny plant that embodies one of the
many spirits of nature. Other than taking the form of a plant
instead of an animal, this familiar uses all the same rules as
other familiars, which are detailed on page 217.
KEY TERMS
You’ll see the following key term in many druid
class features.
Metamagic: Actions with the metamagic trait tweak
the properties of your spells. These actions usually come
from metamagic feats. You must use the metamagic action
directly before Casting the Spell you want to alter. If you
use any action (including free actions and reactions) other
than Cast a Spell directly after, you waste the benefits of
the metamagic action. Any additional effects added by a
metamagic action are part of the spell’s effect, not of the
metamagic action itself.
133
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SAMPLE DRUID
WILD DRUID
Taking on the forms of dangerous creatures, you fight
with feral intensity. Though you trust your instincts,
you might mistrust the ways of polite society.
ABILITY SCORES
Prioritize Wisdom and Strength so you can cast spells
and enter melee combat. You’ll also want Dexterity and
Constitution to improve your defenses and survivability.
SKILLS
Acrobatics, Athletics, Intimidation, Nature
ORDER
Wild
HIGHER-LEVEL FEATS
Form Control (4th), Insect Shape (6th), Soaring Shape
(8th), Plant Shape (10th), Monstrosity Shape (16th)
PREPARED SPELLS
1st heal, magic fang; Cantrips dancing lights, detect magic,
know direction, produce flame, tanglefoot
REACH SPELL [one-action] FEAT 1
CONCENTRATE DRUID METAMAGIC
You can extend the range of your spells. If the next action you
use is to Cast a Spell that has a range, increase that spell’s
range by 30 feet. As is standard for increasing spell ranges, if
the spell normally has a range of touch, you extend its range
to 30 feet.
STORM BORN FEAT 1
DRUID
Prerequisites storm order
You are at home out in the elements, reveling in the power of
nature unleashed. You do not take circumstance penalties to
ranged spell attacks or Perception checks caused by weather,
and your targeted spells don’t require a flat check to succeed
against a target concealed by weather (such as fog).
WIDEN SPELL [one-action] FEAT 1
DRUID MANIPULATE METAMAGIC
You manipulate the energy of your spell, causing it to spread
out and affect a wider area. If the next action you use is to Cast
a Spell that has an area of a burst, cone, or line and does not
have a duration, increase the area of that spell. Add 5 feet to the
radius of a burst that normally has a radius of at least 10 feet
(a burst with a smaller radius is not affected). Add 5 feet to the
length of a cone or line that is normally 15 feet long or smaller,
and add 10 feet to the length of a larger cone or line.
WILD SHAPE FEAT 1
DRUID
Prerequisites wild order
You are one with the wild, always changing and adapting to
meet any challenge. You gain the wild shape order spell, which
lets you transform into a variety of forms that you can expand
with druid feats.
2ND LEVEL
CALL OF THE WILD FEAT 2
DRUID
You call upon the creatures of nature to come to your aid. You
can spend 10 minutes in concert with nature to replace one
of the spells you’ve prepared in one of your druid spell slots
with a summon animal or summon plants and fungi spell of the
same level.
ENHANCED FAMILIAR FEAT 2
DRUID
Prerequisites a familiar
You infuse your familiar with additional primal energy,
increasing its abilities. You can select four familiar or master
abilities each day, instead of two.
ORDER EXPLORER FEAT 2
DRUID
You have learned the secrets of another druidic order,
Core Rulebook
134
passing whatever rites of initiation that order requires and gaining access to its secrets.
Choose an order other than your own. You gain a 1st-level feat that lists that order as a
prerequisite, and you are now a member of that order for the purpose of meeting feat
prerequisites. If you commit acts anathema to your new order, you lose all feats and
abilities requiring that order but retain your other druid feats and abilities. You don’t gain
any of the other benefits of the order you chose.
Special You can take this feat multiple times. Each time you do, you must choose a
different order other than your own.
POISON RESISTANCE [one-action] FEAT 2
DRUID
Your affinity for the natural world grants you protection against some of its dangers. You
gain poison resistance equal to half your level, and you gain a +1 status bonus to saving
throws against poisons.
4TH LEVEL
FORM CONTROL [one-action] FEAT 4
DRUID MANIPULATE METAMAGIC
Prerequisites Strength 14, Wild Shape
With additional care and effort, you can take on an alternate form for a longer period
of time. If your next action is to cast wild shape, wild shape’s spell level is 2 lower than
normal (minimum 1st level), but you can remain transformed for up to 1 hour or the listed
duration (whichever is longer). You can still Dismiss the form at any time, as permitted
by the spell.
MATURE ANIMAL COMPANION FEAT 4
DRUID
Prerequisites Animal Companion
Your animal companion grows up, becoming a mature animal companion, which grants it
additional capabilities. See the animal companion rules on page 214 for more information.
Your animal companion is better trained than most. During an encounter, even if you don’t
use the Command an Animal action, your animal companion can still use 1 action on your
turn that round to Stride or Strike.
ORDER MAGIC FEAT 4
DRUID
Prerequisites Order Explorer
You have delved deeper into the teaching of a new order, gaining access to a coveted order
spell. Choose an order you have selected with Order Explorer. You gain the initial order spell
from that order.
Special You can take this feat multiple times. Each time you do, you must choose a
different order you have selected with Order Explorer.
THOUSAND FACES FEAT 4
DRUID
Prerequisites Wild Shape
Your form is as mutable as the weather, changing to meet your whim. You add the forms
listed in humanoid form to your wild shape list.
WOODLAND STRIDE FEAT 4
DRUID
Prerequisites leaf order
You can always find a path, almost as if foliage parted before you. You ignore any
difficult terrain caused by plants, such as bushes, vines, and undergrowth. Even plants
manipulated by magic don’t impede your progress.
DRUID FEATS
If you need to look up a druid
feat by name instead of by level,
use this table.
Feat Level
Animal Companion 1
Call of the Wild 2
Dragon Shape 12
Effortless Concentration 16
Elemental Shape 10
Enhanced Familiar 2
Ferocious Shape 8
Fey Caller 8
Form Control 4
Green Empathy 6
Green Tongue 12
Healing Transformation 10
Hierophant’s Power 20
Impaling Briars 16
Incredible Companion 8
Insect Shape 6
Invoke Disaster 18
Leshy Familiar 1
Leyline Conduit 20
Mature Animal Companion 4
Monstrosity Shape 16
Order Explorer 2
Order Magic 4
Overwhelming Energy 10
Perfect Form Control 18
Plant Shape 10
Poison Resistance 2
Primal Focus 12
Primal Summons 12
Primal Wellspring 18
Reach Spell 1
Side by Side 10
Soaring Shape 8
Specialized Companion 14
Steady Spellcasting 6
Storm Born 1
Storm Retribution 6
Thousand Faces 4
Timeless Nature 14
True Shapeshifter 20
Verdant Metamorphosis 14
Widen Spell 1
Wild Shape 1
Wind Caller 8
Woodland Stride 4
135
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SAMPLE DRUID 6TH LEVEL
GREEN EMPATHY FEAT 6
DRUID
Prerequisites leaf order
You can communicate with plants on a basic level and use
Diplomacy to Make an Impression on them and to make very
simple Requests of them. Non-creature plants typically can’t
fulfill most requests you might ask of them unless you have
access to other magic such as speak with plants. Because of
your affiliation with the leaf order, plants have a sense that
you support them, so you gain a +2 circumstance bonus on
your check to Make a Request of a plant using Green Empathy.
INSECT SHAPE FEAT 6
DRUID
Prerequisites Wild Shape
Your understanding of life expands, allowing you to mimic a
wider range of creatures. Add the forms in insect form to your
wild shape list. Whenever you use wild shape to polymorph
into the non-flying insect form listed in pest form, the duration
is 24 hours instead of 10 minutes.
STEADY SPELLCASTING FEAT 6
DRUID
Confident in your technique, you don’t lose spells easily. If a
reaction would disrupt your spellcasting action, attempt a DC
15 flat check. If you succeed, your action isn’t disrupted.
STORM RETRIBUTION [reaction] FEAT 6
DRUID
Prerequisites storm order, tempest surge order spell
Trigger An opponent adjacent to you critically hits you with a
melee weapon or melee unarmed attack.
Requirements You have at least 1 available Focus Point.
You lash out, directing a burst of storming fury toward a
creature that has harmed you. You cast tempest surge on the
triggering opponent and push that creature, moving it 5 feet
away from you if it fails its Reflex save, or 10 feet if it critically
fails. This movement is forced movement.
8TH LEVEL
FEROCIOUS SHAPE FEAT 8
DRUID
Prerequisites Wild Shape
You have mastered the shape of ferocious dinosaurs. Add
the forms listed in dinosaur form to your wild shape list.
Whenever you use wild shape to take a form that grants you
a specific Athletics modifier, you gain a +1 status bonus to your
Athletics checks.
FEY CALLER FEAT 8
DRUID
You have learned some of the tricks the fey use to bend primal
magic toward illusions and trickery. Add illusory disguise,
STORM DRUID
You call upon the power of nature to let loose bolts
of lightning, intense weather, and elemental spells.
ABILITY SCORES
Prioritize Wisdom. You typically stay at range, so take a
high Dexterity. You can choose whether to focus more on
your health with Constitution or be more knowledgeable
and skilled with Intelligence.
SKILLS
Acrobatics, Medicine, Nature, Survival
ORDER
Storm
FEATS
Widen Spell (1st), Storm Retribution (6th), Wind Caller
(8th), Primal Focus (12th), Invoke Disaster (18th)
PREPARED SPELLS
1st burning hands, gust of wind; Cantrips detect magic,
electric arc, know direction, light, ray of frost
Core Rulebook
136
illusory object, illusory scene, and veil to your spell list as
primal spells.
INCREDIBLE COMPANION FEAT 8
DRUID
Prerequisites Mature Animal Companion
Your animal companion continues to grow and develop. It
becomes a nimble or savage animal companion (your choice),
gaining additional capabilities determined by the type of
companion (page 214).
SOARING SHAPE FEAT 8
DRUID
Prerequisites Wild Shape
Wings free you from the shackles of the ground below. Add
the bat and bird forms in aerial form to your wild shape list.
If you have Insect Shape, you also add the wasp form to your
wild shape list. If you have Ferocious Shape, you also add the
pterosaur form to your wild shape list. Whenever you use
wild shape to gain a form that grants you a specific Acrobatics
modifier, you gain a +1 status bonus to Acrobatics checks.
WIND CALLER FEAT 8
DRUID
Prerequisites storm order
You bid the winds to lift and carry you through the air. You
gain the stormwind flight order spell. Increase the number of
Focus Points in your focus pool by 1.
10TH LEVEL
ELEMENTAL SHAPE FEAT 10
DRUID
Prerequisites Wild Shape
You understand the fundamental elements of nature such that
you can imbue them into your body and manifest as a living
embodiment of those elements. Add the forms in elemental
form to your wild shape list. Whenever you’re polymorphed
into another form using wild shape, you gain resistance
5 to fire.
HEALING TRANSFORMATION [one-action] FEAT 10
DRUID METAMAGIC
You can take advantage of shapechanging magic to close
wounds and patch injuries. If your next action is to cast a
non-cantrip polymorph spell that targets only one creature,
your polymorph spell also restores 1d6 Hit Points per spell
level to that creature. This is a healing effect.
OVERWHELMING ENERGY [one-action] FEAT 10
DRUID MANIPULATE METAMAGIC
With a complex gesture, you call upon the primal power
of your spell to overcome enemies’ resistances. If the next
action you use is to Cast a Spell, the spell ignores an amount
of the target’s resistance to acid, cold, electricity, fire, or sonic
damage equal to your level. This applies to all damage the
spell deals, including persistent damage and damage caused
137
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SAMPLE DRUID by an ongoing effect of the spell, such as the wall created by
wall of fire. A creature’s immunities are unaffected.
PLANT SHAPE FEAT 10
DRUID
Prerequisites leaf order or Wild Shape
You can take the form of a plant creature. Add the forms
listed in plant form to your wild shape list; if you don’t
have wild shape, you can instead cast plant form once
per day, heightened to the highest spell level you can
cast. Whenever you’re polymorphed into another form
using wild shape, you gain resistance 5 to poison.
SIDE BY SIDE FEAT 10
DRUID
Prerequisites Animal Companion
You and your animal companion fight in tandem, distracting
your foes and keeping them off balance. Whenever you and
your animal companion are adjacent to the same foe, you are
both flanking that foe with each other, regardless of your
actual positions.
12TH LEVEL
DRAGON SHAPE FEAT 12
DRUID
Prerequisites Soaring Shape
You can take on the form of some of the world’s most fearsome
creatures. Add the forms listed in dragon form to your wild
shape list. Whenever you’re polymorphed into another form
using wild shape, you gain resistance 5 to your choice of acid,
cold, electricity, fire, or poison.
GREEN TONGUE FEAT 12
DRUID
Prerequisites Green Empathy
You share a special kinship with all things green and living.
You (and your leshy familiar, if you have one) are constantly
under the effects of speak with plants. Most non-creature
plants recognize you as a druid of the leaf order and are
friendly to you.
PRIMAL FOCUS FEAT 12
DRUID
Your connection to nature is particularly strong, and the
spirits of nature flock around you, helping you replenish your
focus. If you have spent at least 2 Focus Points since the last
time you Refocused, you recover 2 Focus Points when you
Refocus instead of 1.
PRIMAL SUMMONS FEAT 12
DRUID
Prerequisites Call of the Wild
Whenever you summon an ally, you can empower it with
the elemental power of air, earth, fire, or water. You gain the
primal summons order spell.
LEAF DRUID
You’re a nurturing caretaker in tune with the
natural world and the magic of life. A little plant
creature called a leshy accompanies you.
ABILITY SCORES
Prioritize Wisdom. Take Dexterity and Constitution for
your defenses, and Charisma to be more diplomatic or
Strength if you want to deal more damage in melee.
SKILLS
Diplomacy, Medicine, Nature, Survival
ORDER
Leaf
FEATS
Call of the Wild (2nd), Woodland Stride (4th), Green
Empathy (6th), Plant Shape (10th), Green Tongue (12th)
PREPARED SPELLS
1st heal, summon plants and fungi; Cantrips detect magic,
know direction, light, stabilize, tanglefoot
Core Rulebook
138
14TH LEVEL
SPECIALIZED COMPANION FEAT 14
DRUID
Prerequisites Incredible Companion
Your animal companion continues to grow in power and ability,
and it is now cunning enough to become specialized. Your
animal companion gains one specialization of your choice. (See
the Animal Companion section on page 214.)
Special You can select this feat up to three times. Each time,
add a different specialization to your companion.
TIMELESS NATURE FEAT 14
DRUID
With primal magic sustaining you, you cease aging. The
overflowing primal energy gives you a +2 status bonus to saves
against diseases and primal magic.
VERDANT METAMORPHOSIS FEAT 14
DRUID
Prerequisites leaf order
You transform into a plant version of yourself. You gain the
plant trait and lose any trait that’s inappropriate for your new
form (typically humanoid for a PC, but also possibly animal or
fungus). You can change from a form that looks mostly like
your old self into a tree or any other non-creature plant as
a single action, which has the concentrate trait. This has the
same effect as tree shape, except you can turn into any kind of
non-creature plant and your AC is 30.
If you rest for 10 minutes while transformed into a noncreature plant during daylight hours under direct sunlight,
you recover half your maximum Hit Points. If you take your
daily rest in this way, the rest restores you to maximum Hit
Points and removes all non-permanent drained, enfeebled,
clumsy, and stupefied conditions, as well as all poisons and
diseases of 19th level or lower.
16TH LEVEL
EFFORTLESS CONCENTRATION [free-action] FEAT 16
DRUID
Trigger Your turn begins.
You maintain a spell with hardly a thought. You immediately
gain the effects of the Sustain a Spell action, allowing you to
extend the duration of one of your active druid spells.
IMPALING BRIARS FEAT 16
DRUID
Prerequisites leaf order
You can fill an area with devastating briars that impale and
impede your foes. You gain the impaling briars order spell.
Increase the number of Focus Points in your focus pool by 1.
MONSTROSITY SHAPE FEAT 16
DRUID
Prerequisites Wild Shape
You can transform into a powerful magical creature. Add the
purple worm and sea serpent forms listed in monstrosity form
to your wild shape list. If you have Soaring Shape, add the
phoenix form listed in aerial form to your wild shape list.
18TH LEVEL
INVOKE DISASTER FEAT 18
DRUID
Prerequisites Wind Caller
You can invoke nature’s fury upon your foes. You gain the
storm lord order spell. Increase the number of Focus Points in
your focus pool by 1.
PERFECT FORM CONTROL FEAT 18
DRUID
Prerequisites Form Control, Strength 18
Thanks to magic and muscle memory, you can stay in your
alternate forms indefinitely; you may have even forgotten
your original form. When you use Form Control, instead of
lasting 1 hour, wild shape is permanent until you Dismiss it.
PRIMAL WELLSPRING FEAT 18
DRUID
Prerequisites Wild Focus
Your reservoir of Focus Points is a deep wellspring. If you have
spent at least 3 Focus Points since the last time you Refocused,
you recover 3 Focus Points when you Refocus instead of 1.
20TH LEVEL
HIEROPHANT’S POWER FEAT 20
DRUID
Prerequisites legendary in Nature
You have entwined yourself with the natural world, and its full
power flows through you. You gain an additional 10th-level
spell slot.
LEYLINE CONDUIT [one-action] FEAT 20
CONCENTRATE DRUID MANIPULATE METAMAGIC
Frequency once per minute
You can cast your spells effortlessly by tapping into the
leylines of the world. If your next action is to Cast a Spell of
5th level or lower that has no duration, you don’t expend the
prepared spell as you cast it.
TRUE SHAPESHIFTER [two-actions] FEAT 20
CONCENTRATE DRUID
Prerequisites Dragon Shape, Wild Shape
You transcend the limitations of form. While under the effects
of wild shape, you can change into any other form on your
wild shape list; if the durations of the forms would vary, use
the shorter of the two durations.
Once per day, you can transform into a kaiju, with the
effects of nature incarnate; if you have Plant Shape, you can
instead transform into a green man.
139
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Core Rulebook
140
During combat encounters...
You strike with unmatched accuracy and use specialized combat techniques. A melee
fighter stands between allies and enemies, attacking foes who try to get past. A
ranged fighter delivers precise shots from a distance.
During social encounters...
You can be an intimidating presence. This can be useful when negotiating with
enemies, but is sometimes a liability in more genteel interactions.
While exploring...
You keep up your defenses in preparation for combat, and keep an eye out for
hidden threats. You also overcome physical challenges in your way, breaking down
doors, lifting obstacles, climbing adeptly, and leaping across pits.
In downtime...
You might perform manual labor or craft and repair armaments. If you know
techniques you no longer favor, you might train yourself in new ones. If you’ve
established your reputation, you might build an organization or a stronghold of
your own.
You Might...
• Know the purpose and quality of every weapon and piece of armor you own.
• Recognize that the danger of an adventurer’s life must be balanced out with great
revelry or ambitious works.
• Have little patience for puzzles or problems that require detailed logic or study.
Others Probably...
• Find you intimidating until they get to know you—and maybe even after they get
to know you.
• Expect you’re all brawn and no brains.
• Respect your expertise in the art of warfare and value your opinion on the quality
of armaments.
Fighter
Fighting for honor, greed, loyalty, or simply the thrill of battle, you are an
undisputed master of weaponry and combat techniques. You combine your
actions through clever combinations of opening moves, finishing strikes, and
counterattacks whenever your foes are unwise enough to drop their guard. Whether you
are a knight, mercenary, sharpshooter, or blade master, you have honed your martial skills
into an art form and perform devastating critical attacks on your enemies.
Initial Proficiencies
At 1st level, you gain the
listed proficiency ranks in
the following statistics. You
are untrained in anything
not listed unless you gain a
better proficiency rank in some
other way.
Perception
Expert in Perception
Saving Throws
Expert in Fortitude
Expert in Reflex
Trained in Will
Skills
Trained in your choice of
Acrobatics or Athletics
Trained in a number of
additional skills equal to 3 plus
your Intelligence modifier
Attacks
Expert in simple weapons
Expert in martial weapons
Trained in advanced weapons
Expert in unarmed attacks
Defenses
Trained in all armor
Trained in unarmored defense
Class DC
Trained in fighter class DC
Key Ability
STRENGTH OR DEXTERITY
At 1st level, your class gives you
an ability boost to your choice of
Strength or Dexterity.
Hit Points
10 plus your Constitution modifier
You increase your maximum number of
HP by this number at 1st level and every
level thereafter.
CLASSES 3
141
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Class Features
You gain these abilities as a fighter. Abilities gained at
higher levels list the level at which you gain them next to
the features’ names.
Ancestry and Background
In addition to the abilities provided by your class at 1st
level, you have the benefits of your selected ancestry and
background, as described in Chapter 2.
Initial Proficiencies
At 1st level you gain a number of proficiencies that
represent your basic training. These proficiencies are
noted at the start of this class.
Attack of Opportunity
Ever watchful for weaknesses, you can quickly attack
foes that leave an opening in their defenses. You gain the
Attack of Opportunity reaction.
ATTACK OF OPPORTUNITY [reaction]
Trigger A creature within your reach uses a manipulate action
or a move action, makes a ranged attack, or leaves a square
during a move action it’s using.
You lash out at a foe that leaves an opening. Make a melee Strike
against the triggering creature. If your attack is a critical hit and
the trigger was a manipulate action, you disrupt that action.
This Strike doesn’t count toward your multiple attack penalty,
and your multiple attack penalty doesn’t apply to this Strike.
Fighter Feats
At 1st level and every even-numbered level thereafter, you
gain a fighter class feat. Fighter class feats are described
beginning on page 144.
Shield Block
You gain the Shield Block general feat (found on page
266), a reaction that lets you reduce damage with
your shield.
Skill Feats 2nd
At 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a
skill feat. Skill feats can be found in Chapter 5 and
have the skill trait. You must be trained or better in the
corresponding skill to select a skill feat.
Bravery 3rd
Having faced countless foes and the chaos of battle, you
have learned how to stand strong in the face of fear and
keep on fighting. Your proficiency rank for Will saves
increases to expert. When you roll a success at a Will save
against a fear effect, you get a critical success instead.
In addition, anytime you gain the frightened condition,
reduce its value by 1.
General Feats 3rd
At 3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter, you gain a
general feat. General feats are listed in Chapter 5.
Skill Increases 3rd
At 3rd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a skill
increase. You can use this increase either to increase your
proficiency rank to trained in one skill you’re untrained
in, or to increase your proficiency rank in one skill in
which you’re already trained to expert.
At 7th level, you can use skill increases to increase
your proficiency rank to master in a skill in which you’re
already an expert, and at 15th level, you can use them to
increase your proficiency rank to legendary in a skill in
which you’re already a master.
Ability Boosts 5th
At 5th level and every 5 levels thereafter, you boost four
different ability scores. You can use these ability boosts to
increase your ability scores above 18. Boosting an ability
score increases it by 1 if it’s already 18 or above, or by 2
if it starts out below 18.
Ancestry Feats 5th
In addition to the ancestry feat you started with, you gain
an ancestry feat at 5th level and every 4 levels thereafter.
TABLE 3–12: FIGHTER ADVANCEMENT
Your
Level Class Features
1 Ancestry and background, initial proficiencies,
attack of opportunity, fighter feat, shield block
2 Fighter feat, skill feat
3 Bravery, general feat, skill increase
4 Fighter feat, skill feat
5 Ability boosts, ancestry feat, fighter weapon
mastery, skill increase
6 Fighter feat, skill feat
7 Battlefield surveyor, general feat, skill increase,
weapon specialization
8 Fighter feat, skill feat
9 Ancestry feat, combat flexibility, juggernaut,
skill increase
10 Ability boosts, fighter feat, skill feat
11 Armor expertise, fighter expertise, general feat,
skill increase
12 Fighter feat, skill feat
13 Ancestry feat, skill increase, weapon legend
14 Fighter feat, skill feat
15 Ability boosts, evasion, general feat, greater weapon
specialization, improved flexibility, skill increase
16 Fighter feat, skill feat
17 Ancestry feat, armor mastery, skill increase
18 Fighter feat, skill feat
19 General feat, skill increase, versatile legend
20 Ability boosts, fighter feat, skill feat
Core Rulebook
142
armaments, and you’ve developed unparalleled skill with
your favorite weapons. Your proficiency ranks for simple
and martial weapons increase to master. Your proficiency
rank for advanced weapons increases to expert.
You can select one weapon group and increase your
proficiency ranks to legendary for all simple and martial
weapons in that weapon group, and to master for all
advanced weapons in that weapon group.
Evasion 15th
You’ve learned to move quickly to avoid explosions, a
dragon’s breath, and worse. Your proficiency rank for
Reflex saves increases to master. When you roll a success
on a Reflex save, you get a critical success instead.
Greater Weapon Specialization 15th
Your damage from weapon specialization increases to 4
with weapons and unarmed attacks in which you’re an
expert, 6 if you’re a master, and 8 if you’re legendary.
Improved Flexibility 15th
Your extensive experience gives you even greater ability
to adapt to each day’s challenges. When you use combat
The list of ancestry feats available to you can be found in
your ancestry’s entry in Chapter 2.
Fighter Weapon Mastery 5th
Hours spent training with your preferred weapons,
learning and developing new combat techniques, have
made you particularly effective with your weapons of
choice. Choose one weapon group. Your proficiency rank
increases to master with the simple and martial weapons
in that group, and to expert with the advanced weapons
in that group. You gain access to the critical specialization
effects (page 283) of all weapons for which you have
master proficiency.
Battlefield Surveyor 7th
Whether taking stock of an enemy army or simply standing
guard, you excel at observing your foes. Your proficiency
rank for Perception increases to master. In addition, you
gain a +2 circumstance bonus to Perception checks for
initiative, making you faster to react during combat.
Weapon Specialization 7th
You’ve learned how to inflict greater injuries with the
weapons you know best. You deal 2 additional damage
with weapons and unarmed attacks in which you are an
expert. This damage increases to 3 if you’re a master, and to
4 if you’re legendary.
Combat Flexibility 9th
Through your experience in battle, you can prepare your
tactics to suit different situations. When you make your
daily preparations, you gain one fighter feat of 8th level
or lower that you don’t already have. You can use that
feat until your next daily preparations. You must meet all
of the feat’s other prerequisites.
Juggernaut 9th
Your body is accustomed to physical hardship and
resistant to ailments. Your proficiency rank for Fortitude
saves increases to master. When you roll a success on a
Fortitude save, you get a critical success instead.
Armor Expertise 11th
You have spent so much time wearing armor that you know
how to make the most of its protection. Your proficiency
rank for light, medium, and heavy armor, as well as for
unarmored defense, increase to expert. You gain the armor
specialization effects of medium and heavy armor.
Fighter Expertise 11th
You’ve practiced your techniques to make them harder
to resist. Your proficiency rank for your fighter class DC
increases to expert.
Weapon Legend 13th
You’ve learned fighting techniques that apply to all
KEY TERMS
You’ll see the following key terms in many fighter
class features.
Flourish: Actions with this trait are special techniques
that require too much exertion for you to perform
frequently. You can use only 1 action with the flourish
trait per turn.
Open: These maneuvers work only as the first salvo in
the attacks you make on your turn. You can use an action
with the open trait only if you haven’t used an action with
the attack or open trait yet this turn.
Press: Actions with this trait allow you to follow up
earlier attacks. An action with the press trait can be
used only if you are currently affected by a multiple
attack penalty.
Some actions with the press trait also grant an effect
on a failure. The effects that are added on a failure don’t
apply on a critical failure. If your press action succeeds,
you can choose to apply the failure effect instead. (For
example, you may wish to do this when an attack deals
no damage due to resistance.) Because a press action
requires a multiple attack penalty, you can’t use one when
it’s not your turn, even if you use the Ready activity.
Stance: A stance is a general combat strategy that
you enter by using an action with the stance trait, and
you remain in for some time. A stance lasts until you get
knocked out, until its requirements (if any) are violated,
until the encounter ends, or until you enter a new stance,
whichever comes first. After you take an action with the
stance trait, you can’t take another one for 1 round. You
can enter or be in a stance only in encounter mode.
143
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
flexibility, you can gain two fighter feats instead of one. While the first feat must
still be 8th level or lower, the second feat can be up to 14th level, and you can use
the first feat to meet the prerequisites of the second feat. You must meet all of the
feats’ prerequisites.
Armor Mastery 17th
Your skill with armor improves, increasing your ability to prevent blows. Your
proficiency ranks for light, medium, and heavy armor, as well as for unarmored
defense, increase to master.
Versatile Legend 19th
You are nigh-unmatched with any weapon. Your proficiency ranks for simple
weapons, martial weapons, and unarmed attacks increase to legendary, and your
proficiency rank for advanced weapons increases to master. Your proficiency rank
for your fighter class DC increases to master.
Fighter Feats
At each level that you gain a fighter feat, you can select one of the following feats.
You must satisfy any prerequisites before taking the feat.
1ST LEVEL
DOUBLE SLICE [two-actions] FEAT 1
FIGHTER
Requirements You are wielding two melee weapons, each in a different hand.
You lash out at your foe with both weapons. Make two Strikes, one with each of your two
melee weapons, each using your current multiple attack penalty. Both Strikes must have
the same target. If the second Strike is made with a weapon that doesn’t have the agile trait,
it takes a –2 penalty.
If both attacks hit, combine their damage, and then add any other applicable effects
from both weapons. You add any precision damage only once, to the attack of your choice.
Combine the damage from both Strikes and apply resistances and weaknesses only once.
This counts as two attacks when calculating your multiple attack penalty.
EXACTING STRIKE [one-action] FEAT 1
FIGHTER PRESS
You make a controlled attack, fully accounting for your momentum. Make a Strike. The
Strike gains the following failure effect.
Failure This attack does not count toward your multiple attack penalty.
POINT-BLANK SHOT [one-action] FEAT 1
FIGHTER OPEN STANCE
Requirements You are wielding a ranged weapon.
You take aim to pick off nearby enemies quickly. When using a ranged volley weapon while
you are in this stance, you don’t take the penalty to your attack rolls from the volley trait.
When using a ranged weapon that doesn’t have the volley trait, you gain a +2 circumstance
bonus to damage rolls on attacks against targets within the weapon’s first range increment.
POWER ATTACK [two-actions] FEAT 1
FIGHTER FLOURISH
You unleash a particularly powerful attack that clobbers your foe but leaves you a bit
unsteady. Make a melee Strike. This counts as two attacks when calculating your multiple
attack penalty. If this Strike hits, you deal an extra die of weapon damage. If you’re at least
10th level, increase this to two extra dice, and if you’re at least 18th level, increase it to
three extra dice.
FIGHTER FEATS
If you need to look up a fighter
feat by name instead of by level,
use this table.
Feat Level
Advanced Weapon Training 6
Advantageous Assault 6
Aggressive Block 2
Agile Grace 10
Assisting Shot 2
Blind-Fight 8
Boundless Reprisals 20
Brutal Finish 12
Brutish Shove 2
Certain Strike 10
Combat Grab 2
Combat Reflexes 10
Debilitating Shot 10
Desperate Finisher 14
Determination 14
Disarming Stance 6
Disarming Twist 10
Disruptive Stance 10
Double Shot 4
Double Slice 1
Dual-Handed Assault 4
Dueling Dance 12
Dueling Parry 2
Dueling Riposte 8
Exacting Strike 1
Fearsome Brute 10
Felling Strike 8
Flinging Shove 12
Furious Focus 6
Graceful Poise 16
Guardian’s Deflection 6
Guiding Finish 14
Guiding Riposte 14
Impossible Volley 18
Improved Dueling Riposte 12
Improved Knockdown 10
Improved Reflexive Shield 16
Improved Twin Riposte 14
Incredible Aim 8
Incredible Ricochet 12
Intimidating Strike 2
Knockdown 4
Lunge 2
Lunging Stance 12
Mirror Shield 10
Mobile Shot Stance 8
Multishot Stance 16
Paragon’s Guard 12
Point-Blank Shot 1
Positioning Assault 8
Power Attack 1
Powerful Shove 4
Quick Reversal 4
Quick Shield Block 8
Reactive Shield 1
Reflexive Shield 6
Revealing Stab 6
Savage Critical 18
Shatter Defenses 6
Shield Warden 6
Shielded Stride 4
Core Rulebook
144
REACTIVE SHIELD [reaction] FEAT 1
FIGHTER
Trigger An enemy hits you with a melee Strike.
Requirements You are wielding a shield.
You can snap your shield into place just as you would take a blow, avoiding the hit at the
last second. You immediately use the Raise a Shield action and gain your shield’s bonus to
AC. The circumstance bonus from the shield applies to your AC when you’re determining
the outcome of the triggering attack.
SNAGGING STRIKE [one-action] FEAT 1
FIGHTER
Requirements You have one hand free, and your target is within reach of that hand.
You combine an attack with quick grappling moves to throw an enemy off balance as long
as it stays in your reach. Make a Strike while keeping one hand free. If this
Strike hits, the target is flat-footed until the start of your next turn or until
it’s no longer within the reach of your hand, whichever comes first.
SUDDEN CHARGE [two-actions] FEAT 1
FIGHTER FLOURISH OPEN
With a quick sprint, you dash up to your foe and swing. Stride twice. If you
end your movement within melee reach of at least one enemy, you can make a
melee Strike against that enemy. You can use Sudden Charge while Burrowing,
Climbing, Flying, or Swimming instead of Striding if you have the corresponding
movement type.
2ND LEVEL
AGGRESSIVE BLOCK [free-action] FEAT 2
FIGHTER
Trigger You use the Shield Block reaction, and the opponent
that triggered Shield Block is adjacent to you and is your
size or smaller.
You push back as you block the attack, knocking your
foe away or off balance. You use your shield to push
the triggering creature, either automatically Shoving it 5
feet or causing it to become flat-footed until the start of
your next turn. The triggering creature chooses whether
to be moved or become flat-footed. If it chooses to be
moved, you choose the direction. If the Shove would
cause it to hit a solid object, enter a square of difficult
terrain, or enter another creature’s space, it must
become flat-footed instead of being moved.
ASSISTING SHOT [one-action] FEAT 2
FIGHTER
With a quick shot, you interfere with a foe in combat.
You can use the Aid action with a ranged weapon you
wield. Instead of being within reach of the target,
you must be within maximum range of the target. An
Assisting Shot uses ammunition and incurs penalties
just like any other attack.
BRUTISH SHOVE [[one-action] FEAT 2
FIGHTER PRESS
Requirements You are wielding a two-handed melee weapon.
Throwing your weight behind your attack, you hit your
Feat (cont.) Level
Snagging Strike 1
Spring Attack 12
Stance Savant 14
Sudden Charge 1
Sudden Leap 8
Swipe 4
Triple Shot 6
Twinned Defense 16
Twin Parry 4
Twin Riposte 10
Two-Weapon Flurry 14
Weapon Supremacy 20
Whirlwind Strike 14
145
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
DUAL-HANDED ASSAULT [one-action] FEAT 4
FIGHTER FLOURISH
Requirements You are wielding a one-handed melee weapon
and have a free hand.
You snap your free hand over to grip your weapon just long
enough to add momentum and deliver a more powerful
blow to your opponent. Make a Strike with the required
weapon. You quickly switch your grip during the Strike in
order to make the attack with two hands. If the weapon
doesn’t normally have the two-hand trait, increase its
weapon damage die by one step for this attack. (Rules on
increasing die size appear on page 279.) If the weapon has
the two-hand trait, you gain the benefit of that trait and
a circumstance bonus to damage equal to the weapon’s
number of damage dice. When the Strike is complete, you
resume gripping the weapon with only one hand. This action
doesn’t end any stance or fighter feat effect that requires
you to have one hand free.
KNOCKDOWN [two-actions] FEAT 4
FIGHTER FLOURISH
Prerequisites trained in Athletics
You make an attack to knock a foe off balance, then follow
up immediately with a sweep to topple them. Make a
melee Strike. If it hits and deals damage, you can attempt
an Athletics check to Trip the creature you hit. If you’re
wielding a two-handed melee weapon, you can ignore Trip’s
requirement that you have a hand free. Both attacks count
toward your multiple attack penalty, but the penalty doesn’t
increase until after you’ve made both of them.
POWERFUL SHOVE FEAT 4
FIGHTER
Prerequisites Aggressive Block or Brutish Shove
You can push larger foes around with your attack. You can use
Aggressive Block or Brutish Shove against a creature up to
two sizes larger than you.
When a creature you Shove has to stop moving because it
would hit an object, it takes damage equal to your Strength
modifier (minimum 1). This happens regardless of how you
Shoved the creature.
QUICK REVERSAL [one-action] FEAT 4
FIGHTER FLOURISH PRESS
Requirements You are flanked by at least two enemies.
You turn your foes’ flanking against them with a quick
reverse. Make a melee Strike against one of the flanking
enemies and make a second Strike with the same weapon
or unarmed attack against a different enemy that is flanking
you. This second Strike has the same multiple attack penalty
of the initial attack and doesn’t count toward your multiple
attack penalty.
SHIELDED STRIDE FEAT 4
FIGHTER
When your shield is up, your enemies’ blows can’t touch you.
opponent hard enough to make it stumble back. Make a
Strike with a two-handed melee weapon. If you hit a target
that is your size or smaller, that creature is flat-footed until
the end of your current turn, and you can automatically
Shove it, with the same benefits as the Shove action
(including the critical success effect, if your Strike was a
critical hit). If you move to follow the target, your movement
doesn’t trigger reactions.
This Strike has the following failure effect.
Failure The target becomes flat-footed until the end of your
current turn.
COMBAT GRAB [one-action] FEAT 2
FIGHTER PRESS
Requirements You have one hand free, and your target is
within reach of that hand.
You swipe at your opponent and grab at them. Make a melee
Strike while keeping one hand free. If the Strike hits, you grab
the target using your free hand. The creature remains grabbed
until the end of your next turn or until it Escapes, whichever
comes first.
DUELING PARRY [one-action] FEAT 2
FIGHTER
Requirements You are wielding only a single one-handed
melee weapon and have your other hand or hands free.
You can parry attacks against you with your one-handed
weapon. You gain a +2 circumstance bonus to AC until the
start of your next turn as long as you continue to meet
the requirements.
INTIMIDATING STRIKE [two-actions] FEAT 2
EMOTION FEAR FIGHTER MENTAL
Your blow not only wounds creatures but also shatters their
confidence. Make a melee Strike. If you hit and deal damage,
the target is frightened 1, or frightened 2 on a critical hit.
LUNGE [one-action] FEAT 2
FIGHTER
Requirement You are wielding a melee weapon.
Extending your body to its limits, you attack an enemy that
would normally be beyond your reach. Make a Strike with a
melee weapon, increasing your reach by 5 feet for that Strike.
If the weapon has the disarm, shove, or trip trait, you can use
the corresponding action instead of a Strike.
4TH LEVEL
DOUBLE SHOT [two-actions] FEAT 4
FIGHTER FLOURISH
Requirements You are wielding a ranged weapon with reload 0.
You shoot twice in blindingly fast succession. Make two
Strikes, each against a separate target and with a –2 penalty.
Both attacks count toward your multiple attack penalty, but
the penalty doesn’t increase until after you’ve made both
of them.
Core Rulebook
146
When you have your shield raised, you can Stride to
move half your Speed without triggering reactions that
are triggered by your movement (such as Attacks of
Opportunity). You can use Shielded Stride while Flying or
Swimming instead of Striding if you have the corresponding
movement type.
SWIPE [two-actions] FEAT 4
FIGHTER FLOURISH
You make a wide, arcing swing. Make a melee Strike and
compare the attack roll result to the AC of up to two foes,
each of whom must be within your melee reach and adjacent
to each other. Roll damage only once and apply it to each
creature you hit. A Swipe counts as two attacks for your
multiple attack penalty.
If you’re using a weapon with the sweep trait, its modifier
applies to all your Swipe attacks.
TWIN PARRY [one-action] FEAT 4
FIGHTER
Requirements You are wielding two melee weapons, one in
each hand.
You use your two weapons to parry attacks. You gain a +1
circumstance bonus to AC until the start of your next turn,
or a +2 circumstance bonus if either weapon has the parry
trait. You lose this circumstance bonus if you no longer meet
this feat’s requirement.
6TH LEVEL
ADVANCED WEAPON TRAINING FEAT 6
FIGHTER
You’ve studied the art of wielding an advanced weapon.
Choose a weapon group. You gain proficiency with all advanced
weapons in that group as if they were martial weapons of
their weapon group.
ADVANTAGEOUS ASSAULT [one-action] FEAT 6
FIGHTER PRESS
When an enemy’s movement is compromised, you deliver a
more deadly blow. Make a Strike against a creature that is
grabbed, prone, or restrained. You gain a circumstance bonus
to damage on this Strike equal to the number of weapon
damage dice, or that number + 2 if you’re wielding the weapon
in two hands. The Strike gains the following failure effect.
Failure You deal damage to the target equal to the number of
weapon damage dice, or that number + 2 if you’re wielding
the weapon in two hands. This damage has the same
damage type as the weapon.
DISARMING STANCE [one-action] FEAT 6
FIGHTER STANCE
Prerequisites trained in Athletics
Requirements You are wielding only a single one-handed
melee weapon and have your other hand or hands free.
147
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SAMPLE FIGHTER You adopt a fencing stance that improves your control over
your weapon. While you are in this stance, you gain a +1
circumstance bonus to Athletics checks to Disarm and a
+2 circumstance bonus to your Reflex DC when defending
against checks to Disarm you. In addition, you can attempt to
Disarm creatures up to two sizes larger than you.
FURIOUS FOCUS FEAT 6
FIGHTER
Prerequisites Power Attack
You’ve learned to maintain your balance even when swinging
furiously. When you make a Power Attack with a melee
weapon you’re wielding in two hands, it counts as one attack
toward your multiple attack penalty instead of two.
GUARDIAN’S DEFLECTION [reaction] FEAT 6
FIGHTER
Trigger An ally within your melee reach is hit by an attack,
you can see the attacker, and the ally gaining a +2
circumstance bonus to AC would turn the critical hit
into a hit or the hit into a miss.
Requirements You are wielding a single one-handed
melee weapon and have your other hand or hands free.
You use your weapon to deflect the attack against your ally,
granting a +2 circumstance bonus to their Armor Class against
the triggering attack. This turns the triggering critical hit into
a hit, or the triggering hit into a miss.
REFLEXIVE SHIELD FEAT 6
FIGHTER
You can use your shield to fend off the worst of area effects
and other damage. When you Raise your Shield, you gain
your shield’s circumstance bonus to Reflex saves. If you have
the Shield Block reaction, damage you take as a result of a
Reflex save can trigger that reaction, even if the damage isn’t
physical damage.
REVEALING STAB [two-actions] FEAT 6
FIGHTER
Requirements You are wielding a melee weapon that deals
piercing damage.
You drive your piercing weapon into an imperceptible foe,
revealing its location to your allies. Make a Strike with the
required melee weapon. You don’t have to attempt a flat check
to hit a concealed creature, and you have to succeed at only a
DC 5 flat check to target a hidden creature. If you hit and deal
damage, you can drive the required weapon into a corporeal
target, revealing its current position. You Release the weapon,
and it becomes lodged in the target. If the target is concealed,
other creatures don’t need to succeed at a flat check to hit
it. If the target is hidden, other creatures have to succeed at
only a DC 5 flat check to target it. The creatures need to be
able to see your weapon to gain any of these benefits, and
the target can’t become undetected to anyone who sees your
weapon. If the target is invisible, the weapon remains visible
while lodged in it.
BULLY
Using a two-handed weapon, you push your foes
about the battlefield and deal grievous wounds. You
excel at taking down the biggest enemy standing in
your way.
ABILITY SCORES
Prioritizing Strength, Constitution, and Wisdom helps
with survivability and increases your damage, and
Dexterity allows extra maneuverability.
SKILLS
Athletics, Crafting, Intimidation, Medicine
STARTING FEAT
Power Attack
HIGHER-LEVEL FEATS
Knockdown (4th), Furious Focus (6th), Positioning Assault
(8th), Brutal Finish (12th), Savage Critical (18th)
Core Rulebook
148
This benefit lasts until the weapon is removed from the
creature. An adjacent creature or the target can remove the
weapon with 2 Interact actions.
SHATTER DEFENSES [one-action] FEAT 6
FIGHTER PRESS
Requirements A frightened creature is in your melee reach.
Your offense exploits your enemy’s fear. Make a melee Strike
against a frightened creature. If you hit and deal damage, the
target becomes flat-footed until its frightened condition ends.
If the target was already flat-footed to you when you damaged
it with this Strike, it can’t reduce its frightened value below 1
until the start of your next turn.
SHIELD WARDEN FEAT 6
FIGHTER
Prerequisites shield block
You use your shield to protect your allies. When you have a
shield raised, you can use your Shield Block reaction when
an attack is made against an ally adjacent to you. If you do,
the shield prevents that ally from taking damage instead of
preventing you from taking damage, following the normal
rules for Shield Block.
TRIPLE SHOT FEAT 6
FIGHTER
Prerequisites Double Shot
You can quickly fire multiple shots with greater control. When
you use Double Shot, you can make the attacks against the
same target. You can add an additional action to Double Shot
to make three ranged Strikes instead of two. If you do, the
penalty is –4. All attacks count toward your multiple attack
penalty, but the penalty doesn’t increase until after you’ve
made all of them.
8TH LEVEL
BLIND-FIGHT FEAT 8
FIGHTER
Prerequisites master in Perception
Your battle instincts make you more aware of concealed
and invisible opponents. You don’t need to succeed at a flat
check to target concealed creatures. You’re not flat-footed
to creatures that are hidden from you (unless you’re flatfooted to them for reasons other than the hidden condition),
and you need only a successful DC 5 flat check to target a
hidden creature.
While you’re adjacent to an undetected creature of your
level or lower, it is instead only hidden from you.
DUELING RIPOSTE [reaction] FEAT 8
FIGHTER
Prerequisites Dueling Parry
Trigger A creature within your reach critically fails a Strike
against you.
Requirements You are benefiting from Dueling Parry.
You riposte against your flailing enemy. Make a melee Strike
against or attempt to Disarm the triggering creature.
FELLING STRIKE [two-actions] FEAT 8
FIGHTER
Your attack can ground an airborne foe. Make a Strike. If it
hits and deals damage to a flying target, the target falls up to
120 feet. The fall is gradual enough that if it causes the target
to hit the ground, the target takes no damage from the fall. If
the attack is a critical hit, the target can’t Fly, Leap, levitate,
or otherwise leave the ground until the end of your next turn.
INCREDIBLE AIM [two-actions] FEAT 8
CONCENTRATE FIGHTER
By spending a moment to focus, you can ensure your attack
strikes true. Make a ranged weapon Strike. On this Strike, you
gain a +2 circumstance bonus to the attack roll and ignore the
target’s concealed condition.
MOBILE SHOT STANCE [one-action] FEAT 8
FIGHTER STANCE
Your shots become nimble and deadly. While you’re in this
stance, your ranged Strikes don’t trigger Attacks of Opportunity
or other reactions that are triggered by a ranged attack.
If you have Attack of Opportunity, you can use it with a
loaded ranged weapon you’re wielding. The triggering creature
must be within 5 feet of you for you to do so.
POSITIONING ASSAULT [two-actions] FEAT 8
FIGHTER FLOURISH
Requirements You are wielding a two-handed melee weapon
and your target is within your reach.
With punishing blows, you force your opponent into position.
Make a Strike with the required weapon. If you hit, you move
the target 5 feet into a space in your reach. This follows the
forced movement rules found on page 475.
QUICK SHIELD BLOCK FEAT 8
FIGHTER
Prerequisites shield block, Reactive Shield
You can bring your shield into place with hardly a thought. At
the start of each of your turns, you gain an additional reaction
that you can use only to Shield Block.
SUDDEN LEAP [two-actions] FEAT 8
FIGHTER
You make an impressive leap and swing while you soar. Make
a Leap, High Jump, or Long Jump and attempt one melee Strike
at any point during your jump. Immediately after the Strike,
you fall to the ground if you’re in the air, even if you haven’t
reached the maximum distance of your jump. If the distance
you fall is no more than the height of your jump, you take no
damage and land upright.
When attempting a High Jump or Long Jump during a
Sudden Leap, determine the DC using the Long Jump DCs, and
increase your maximum distance to double your Speed.
149
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SAMPLE FIGHTER Special If you have Felling Strike, you can spend 3 actions
to make a Sudden Leap and use Felling Strike instead of a
normal Strike.
10TH LEVEL
AGILE GRACE FEAT 10
FIGHTER
Your graceful moves with agile weapons are beyond compare.
Your multiple attack penalty with agile weapons and agile
unarmed attacks becomes –3 for your second attack and –6
for subsequent attacks (rather than –4 and –8).
CERTAIN STRIKE [one-action] FEAT 10
FIGHTER PRESS
Even when you don’t hit squarely, you can still score a glancing
blow. Make a melee Strike. It gains the following failure effect.
Failure Your attack deals any damage it would have dealt on
a hit, excluding all damage dice. (This removes damage dice
from weapon runes, spells, and special abilities, in addition
to weapon damage dice.)
COMBAT REFLEXES FEAT 10
FIGHTER
You are particularly swift at punishing foes who leave you
openings. At the start of each of your turns when you regain
your actions, you gain an additional reaction that can be used
only to make an Attack of Opportunity.
DEBILITATING SHOT [two-actions] FEAT 10
FIGHTER FLOURISH
Aiming for a weak point, you impede your foe with a precise
shot. Make a ranged weapon Strike. If it hits and deals damage,
the target is slowed 1 until the end of its next turn.
DISARMING TWIST [one-action] FEAT 10
FIGHTER PRESS
Prerequisites trained in Athletics
Requirements You are wielding only a single one-handed
melee weapon and have your other hand or hands free.
After your initial attack redirects your foe’s defenses, your
follow-up wrests their weapon from their grasp. Make a
melee Strike with the required weapon. In addition to its
other effects, this Strike gains the success and critical success
effects of the Disarm action. The Strike also has the following
failure effect.
Failure The target is flat-footed until the end of your current
turn.
DISRUPTIVE STANCE [one-action] FEAT 10
FIGHTER STANCE
The slightest distraction can provoke your wrath, and you’re
prepared to foil enemies’ actions. As long as you are in this
stance, you can use Attack of Opportunity when a creature
within your reach uses a concentrate action, in addition to
manipulate and move actions. Furthermore, you disrupt a
DUELIST
With one hand free and a blade in the others,
you are adept at foiling your opponents by way
of misdirection, disarming strikes, and by always
being ready for their clumsy attacks.
ABILITY SCORES
Prioritize Strength. Dexterity and Wisdom help with
survivability and versatility, and Constitution grants
some extra toughness.
SKILLS
Acrobatics, Athletics, Deception, Medicine
STARTING FEAT
Snagging Strike
HIGHER-LEVEL FEATS
Dueling Parry (2nd), Guardian’s Deflection (6th), Dueling
Riposte (8th), Dueling Dance (12th), Stance Savant (14th)
Core Rulebook
150
triggering concentrate or manipulate action if your Strike hits
(not only if it’s a critical hit).
FEARSOME BRUTE FEAT 10
FIGHTER
Fear makes your foes weak and more vulnerable to your
attacks. You gain a circumstance bonus to damage rolls for
Strikes against frightened creatures. The bonus is equal to
double the target’s frightened value.
If you have master proficiency in Intimidation, increase the
bonus to triple the target’s frightened value.
IMPROVED KNOCKDOWN FEAT 10
FIGHTER
Prerequisites Knockdown
You can dash your foe to the ground with a single blow. When
you use Knockdown, instead of making a Strike followed by a
Trip, you can attempt a single Strike. If you do and your Strike
hits, you also apply the critical success effect of a Trip. If you
used a two-handed melee weapon for the Strike, you can use
the weapon’s damage die size instead of the regular die size
for the damage from a critical Trip.
MIRROR SHIELD [reaction] FEAT 10
FIGHTER
Trigger An opponent casting a spell that targets you critically
fails a spell attack roll against your AC.
Requirements You have a shield raised.
You reflect the spell back against the triggering opponent.
Make a ranged attack against the triggering creature using
your highest proficiency with a ranged weapon. If you can cast
spells, you can make a spell attack roll instead. If you succeed,
your opponent takes the effects of a successful spell attack
roll for their own spell (or the effects of a critical success if
your attack roll was a critical success).
TWIN RIPOSTE [reaction] FEAT 10
FIGHTER
Trigger A creature within your reach critically fails a Strike
against you.
Requirements You are benefiting from Twin Parry.
A clever parry with one weapon leaves your opponent open to
an attack with the other weapon. Make a melee Strike or use a
Disarm action against the triggering opponent.
12TH LEVEL
BRUTAL FINISH [one-action] FEAT 12
FIGHTER PRESS
Requirements You are wielding a melee weapon in two hands.
Your final blow can make an impact even if it rebounds off a
foe’s defenses. Make a Strike with the required weapon. After
the Strike, your turn ends. The Strike deals one extra weapon
damage die, or two extra weapon damage dice if you’re at least
18th level. The Strike also gains the following failure effect.
Failure You deal damage equal to one weapon damage die of
the required weapon. Increase this to two dice if you’re at
least 18th level.
DUELING DANCE [one-action] FEAT 12
FIGHTER STANCE
Prerequisites Dueling Parry
Requirements You are wielding only a single one-handed
melee weapon and have your other hand or hands free.
Using your free hand as pivot and balance, you both attack
and defend with your weapon. While you are in this stance,
you constantly have the benefits of Dueling Parry.
FLINGING SHOVE FEAT 12
FIGHTER
Prerequisites Aggressive Block or Brutish Shove
Increase the distance you Shove your opponent with
Aggressive Block or Brutish Shove to 10 feet on a success or
20 feet on a critical success. When you use Aggressive Block,
you can choose whether the target is flat-footed or Shoved.
When you make a Brutish Shove, you also Shove the target 5
feet on a failure.
IMPROVED DUELING RIPOSTE FEAT 12
FIGHTER
Prerequisites Dueling Riposte
Your weapon whirls and darts, striking foes whenever the
opportunity presents itself. At the start of each of your turns,
you gain an additional reaction that you can use only to make
a Dueling Riposte. You can use this extra reaction even if you
are not benefiting from Dueling Parry.
INCREDIBLE RICOCHET [one-action] FEAT 12
CONCENTRATE FIGHTER PRESS
Prerequisites Incredible Aim
After your first shot singles out your opponent’s position, you
direct another that ricochets around obstacles and strikes
unerringly. Make a ranged weapon Strike. You ignore the
target’s concealed condition and all cover.
LUNGING STANCE [one-action] FEAT 12
FIGHTER STANCE
Prerequisites attack of opportunity, Lunge
Requirement You are wielding a melee weapon.
Your body coiled to strike, you can lash out at distant enemies.
While you are in this stance, you can use Attack of Opportunity
against a creature that is outside your reach but within the
reach you would have with a Lunge. If you do, you increase
your range with the Strike by 5 feet.
PARAGON’S GUARD [one-action] FEAT 12
FIGHTER STANCE
Requirements You are wielding a shield.
Once you’ve had a moment to set your stance, you always have
your shield ready without a thought. While you are in this stance,
you constantly have your shield raised as if you’d used the Raise
a Shield action, as long as you meet that action’s requirements.
151
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SAMPLE FIGHTER SPRING ATTACK [one-action] FEAT 12
FIGHTER PRESS
Requirements You are adjacent to an enemy.
Springing away from one foe, you Strike at another. Stride up
to your Speed, but you must end that movement within melee
reach of a different enemy. At the end of your movement,
make a melee Strike against an enemy now within reach. You
can use Spring Attack while Burrowing, Climbing, Flying, or
Swimming instead of Striding if you have the corresponding
movement type.
14TH LEVEL
DESPERATE FINISHER [reaction] FEAT 14
FIGHTER
Trigger You complete the last action on your turn, and your
turn has not ended yet.
Requirements You meet the requirements to use an action
with the press trait.
You throw everything into one last press. Use a single action
that you know with the press trait as part of Desperate
Finisher. You forgo the ability to use reactions until the start
of your next turn.
DETERMINATION [one-action] FEAT 14
CONCENTRATE FIGHTER
Frequency once per day
Your training allows you to shrug off your foes’ spells
and conditions when the need is dire. Choose a single
nonpermanent spell or condition that is affecting you. If you
chose a condition, its effect on you ends. If you chose a spell,
attempt to counteract the spell (your level is your counteract
level, and you attempt a Will save as your counteract check).
This doesn’t remove any Hit Point damage normally
dealt by the spell or condition, and it doesn’t prevent the
spell or debilitating effect from affecting other allies or the
environment around you. It can’t remove an ongoing affliction
or prevent such an affliction from inflicting conditions on you
later. It can’t remove conditions from the situation (such as
prone or flanked). If the effect comes from a creature, hazard,
or item of 20th level or higher, Determination can’t remove its
effect on you.
GUIDING FINISH [one-action] FEAT 14
FIGHTER PRESS
Requirements You are wielding only a single one-handed
melee weapon and have your other hand or hands free.
Using your weapon as a lever, you force your opponent
to end up right where you want them. Make a Strike
with the required weapon. If the Strike hits, you can
move the target up to 10 feet into a space in your reach.
You can move the target through your space during this
movement. This follows the forced movement rules found on
page 475. Your Strike gains the following failure effect.
Failure You can force the creature to move as you would on a
success, but you can move the target only 5 feet.
Archer
You take out your opponents from a distance with
ranged weapons, and you excel at dispatching flying
or other hard-to-reach enemies.
ABILITY SCORES
Prioritize Dexterity. Constitution and Wisdom helps with
survivability, and Strength adds damage with propulsive
weapons.
SKILLS
Acrobatics, Medicine, Stealth, Thievery
STARTING FEAT
Point-Blank Shot
HIGHER-LEVEL FEATS
Double Shot (4th), Triple Shot (6th), Debilitating Shot
(10th), Multishot Stance (16th), Impossible Volley (18th)
Core Rulebook
152
GUIDING RIPOSTE FEAT 14
FIGHTER
Prerequisites Dueling Riposte
By shifting your weight and angling your weapon, you guide
your opponent to a more favorable position. When you use
Dueling Riposte to Strike and you hit, you can move the target
up to 10 feet into a space in your reach. This follows the forced
movement rules found on page 475.
IMPROVED TWIN RIPOSTE FEAT 14
FIGHTER
Prerequisites Twin Riposte
Your weapons are a blur, blocking and biting at your foes. At
the start of each of your turns, you gain an additional reaction
that you can use only to perform a Twin Riposte. You can
use this extra reaction even if you are not benefiting from
Twin Parry.
STANCE SAVANT [free-action] FEAT 14
FIGHTER
Trigger You roll initiative.
When there’s imminent danger, you drop into a stance with a
mere thought. Use an action that has the stance trait.
TWO-WEAPON FLURRY [one-action] FEAT 14
FIGHTER FLOURISH PRESS
Requirements You are wielding two weapons, each in a
different hand.
You lash out with both your weapons in a sudden frenzy.
Strike twice, once with each weapon.
WHIRLWIND STRIKE [three-actions] FEAT 14
FIGHTER FLOURISH OPEN
You attack all nearby adversaries. Make a melee Strike against
each enemy within your melee reach. Each attack counts
toward your multiple attack penalty, but do not increase your
penalty until you have made all your attacks.
16TH LEVEL
GRACEFUL POISE [one-action] FEAT 16
FIGHTER STANCE
Prerequisites Double Slice
With the right positioning, your off-hand weapon can strike
like a scorpion’s stinger. While you are in this stance, if you
make your second Strike from Double Slice with an agile
weapon, Double Slice counts as one attack when calculating
your multiple attack penalty.
IMPROVED REFLEXIVE SHIELD FEAT 16
FIGHTER
Prerequisites Reflexive Shield
Your shield can help save nearby allies. When you use Shield
Block against damage resulting from a Reflex save, adjacent
allies who would take damage due to Reflex saves against the
same effect also benefit from the damage reduction.
MULTISHOT STANCE [one-action] FEAT 16
FIGHTER STANCE
Prerequisites Triple Shot
Requirements You are wielding a ranged weapon with
reload 0.
You lock yourself in a stable position so you can fire swiftly
and accurately. While you are in this stance, your penalty for
Double Shot is reduced to –1, or –2 if you add the extra action
to make three Strikes. If you move from your position, this
stance ends.
TWINNED DEFENSE [one-action] FEAT 16
FIGHTER STANCE
Prerequisites Twin Parry
Requirements You are wielding two melee weapons, one in
each hand.
You’re always ready to use your off-hand weapon to interfere
with attacks against you. While you are in this stance, you
constantly gain the benefits of the Twin Parry action.
18TH LEVEL
IMPOSSIBLE VOLLEY [three-actions] FEAT 18
FIGHTER FLOURISH OPEN
Requirements You are wielding a ranged weapon with the
volley trait and reload 0.
You fire a volley at all foes in an area. Make one Strike with a
–2 penalty against each enemy within a 10-foot-radius burst
centered at or beyond your weapon’s volley range. Roll the
damage only once for all targets.
Each attack counts toward your multiple attack penalty,
but do not increase your penalty until you have made all
your attacks.
SAVAGE CRITICAL FEAT 18
FIGHTER
The wounds you inflict are grievous. When you Strike with
a weapon or unarmed attack for which you have legendary
proficiency, you critically succeed if you roll a 19 on the die as
long as that result is a success. This has no effect on a 19 if the
result would be a failure.
20TH LEVEL
BOUNDLESS REPRISALS FEAT 20
FIGHTER
With a sixth sense for the flow of combat, you can quickly
react to any situation as required. At the start of each
enemy’s turn, you gain a reaction you can use only during
that turn.
WEAPON SUPREMACY FEAT 20
FIGHTER
Your skill with weapons lets you attack swiftly at all times.
You’re permanently quickened. You can use your extra action
only to Strike.
153
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Core Rulebook
154
Monk
During combat encounters...
You speed into the fray, dodging or leaping past obstacles with acrobatic maneuvers.
You strike opponents in a rapid flurry of attacks, using your bare fists or wielding
specialized weapons that you mastered during your monastic training. Stances let
you change up your combat style for different situations, and ki abilities allow you
to perform mystic feats like healing yourself and soaring through the air.
During social encounters...
Your perceptiveness lets you see through falsehoods, and your philosophical training
provides insight into any situation.
While exploring...
You climb up walls, dodge traps, overcome obstacles, and leap over pits. You usually
stay toward the outside of the group to protect more vulnerable members, and you’re
well suited to looking for danger or moving stealthily.
In downtime...
You diligently exercise, eat healthy foods, meditate, and study various philosophies.
You might also take up a craft that you strive to perfect.
You Might...
• Maintain a regimen of physical training and meditation.
• Face adversity with a calm and measured approach, never panicking or
succumbing to despair.
• Look to the future for ways you can improve, while remaining at peace with your
present self.
Others Probably...
• Marvel at your feats of physical prowess.
• Think you’re more than a bit uptight, given your vows and tenets.
• Come to you for philosophical advice.
The strength of your fist flows from your mind and spirit. You seek
perfection—honing your body into a flawless instrument and your mind into
an orderly bastion of wisdom. You’re a fierce combatant renowned for martial
arts skills and combat stances that grant you unique fighting moves. While the challenge
of mastering many fighting styles drives you to great heights, you also enjoy meditating
on philosophical questions and discovering new ways to obtain peace and enlightenment.
INITIAL PROFICIENCIES
At 1st level, you gain the
listed proficiency ranks in
the following statistics. You
are untrained in anything
not listed unless you gain a
better proficiency rank in some
other way.
PERCEPTION
Trained in Perception
SAVING THROWS
Expert in Fortitude
Expert in Reflex
Expert in Will
SKILLS
Trained in a number of
skills equal to 4 plus your
Intelligence modifier
ATTACKS
Trained in simple weapons
Trained in unarmed attacks
DEFENSES
Untrained in all armor
Expert in unarmored defense
CLASS DC
Trained in monk class DC
HIT POINTS
10 plus your Constitution modifier
You increase your maximum number of
HP by this number at 1st level and every
level thereafter.
KEY ABILITY
STRENGTH OR DEXTERITY
At 1st level, your class gives you
an ability boost to your choice of
Strength or Dexterity.
CLASSES 3
155
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Class Features
You gain these abilities as a monk. Abilities gained at higher
levels list the requisite levels next to the features’ names.
Ancestry and Background
In addition to the abilities provided by your class at 1st
level, you have the benefits of your selected ancestry and
background, as described in Chapter 2.
Initial Proficiencies
At 1st level, you gain a number of proficiencies representing
your basic training, which are noted at the start of this class.
Flurry of Blows
You can attack rapidly with fists, feet, elbows, knees, and
other unarmed attacks. You gain the Flurry of Blows action.
FLURRY OF BLOWS [one-action]
FLOURISH MONK
Make two unarmed Strikes. If both hit the same creature,
combine their damage for the purpose of resistances and
weaknesses. Apply your multiple attack penalty to the Strikes
normally. As it has the flourish trait, you can use Flurry of
Blows only once per turn.
Monk Feats
At 1st level and every even-numbered level thereafter, you
gain a monk class feat.
Powerful Fist
You know how to wield your fists as deadly weapons.
The damage die for your fist changes to 1d6 instead of
1d4. Most people take a –2 circumstance penalty when
making a lethal attack with nonlethal unarmed attacks,
because they find it hard to use their fists with deadly
force. You don’t take this penalty when making a lethal
attack with your fist or any other unarmed attacks.
Skill Feats 2nd
At 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a skill
feat. Skill feats are listed in Chapter 5 and have the skill
trait. You must be trained or better in the corresponding
skill to select a skill feat.
General Feats 3rd
At 3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter, you gain a
general feat. General feats are listed in Chapter 5.
Incredible Movement 3rd
You move like the wind. You gain a +10-foot status
bonus to your Speed whenever you’re not wearing armor.
The bonus increases by 5 feet for every 4 levels you have
beyond 3rd.
Mystic Strikes 3rd
Focusing your will into your physical attacks imbues
them with mystical energy. Your unarmed attacks
become magical, allowing them to get past resistances
to non-magical attacks. However, you still need an item
such as handwraps of mighty fists to gain an item bonus to
attack rolls or increase your attacks’ weapon damage dice.
Skill Increases 3rd
At 3rd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a
skill increase. You can use this increase to either become
trained in one skill you’re untrained in, or become an
expert in one skill in which you’re already trained.
At 7th level, you can use skill increases to become a
master in a skill in which you’re already an expert, and
at 15th level, you can use them to become legendary in a
skill in which you’re already a master.
Ability Boosts 5th
At 5th level and every 5 levels thereafter, you boost four
different ability scores. You can use these ability boosts to
increase your ability scores above 18. Boosting an ability
TABLE 3–13: MONK ADVANCEMENT
Your
Level Class Features
1 Ancestry and background, initial proficiencies,
flurry of blows, monk feat, powerful fist
2 Monk feat, skill feat
3 General feat, incredible movement +10 feet, mystic
strikes, skill increase
4 Monk feat, skill feat
5 Ability boosts, alertness, ancestry feat, expert
strikes, skill increase
6 Monk feat, skill feat
7 General feat, incredible movement +15 feet, path to
perfection, skill increase, weapon specialization
8 Monk feat, skill feat
9 Ancestry feat, metal strikes, monk expertise,
skill increase
10 Ability boosts, monk feat, skill feat
11 General feat, incredible movement +20 feet, second
path to perfection, skill increase
12 Monk feat, skill feat
13 Ancestry feat, graceful mastery, master strikes,
skill increase
14 Monk feat, skill feat
15 Ability boosts, general feat, greater weapon
specialization, incredible movement +25 feet, skill
increase, third path to perfection
16 Monk feat, skill feat
17 Adamantine strikes, ancestry feat, graceful legend,
skill increase
18 Monk feat, skill feat
19 General feat, incredible movement +30 feet,
perfected form, skill increase
20 Ability boosts, monk feat, skill feat
3 Core Rulebook
156
Core Rulebook
Master Strikes 13th
You have honed your skill in using your body as a
weapon. Your proficiency ranks for unarmed attacks and
simple weapons increase to master.
Greater Weapon Specialization 15th
Your damage from weapon specialization increases to 4
with weapons and unarmed attacks in which you’re an
expert, 6 if you’re a master, and 8 if you’re legendary.
Third Path to Perfection 15th
You have made great progress in your personal studies
of enlightenment. Choose one of the saving throws
you selected for path to perfection or second path to
perfection. Your proficiency rank for the chosen type
of save increases to legendary. When you roll a critical
failure on the chosen type of save, you get a failure
instead. When you fail at the chosen type of save against
an effect that deals damage, you take half damage.
score increases it by 1 if it’s already 18 or above, or by 2
if it starts out below 18.
Alertness 5th
You remain alert to threats around you. Your proficiency
rank for Perception increases to expert.
Ancestry Feats 5th
In addition to the ancestry feat you started with, you gain
an ancestry feat at 5th level and every 4 levels thereafter.
The list of ancestry feats available to you can be found in
your ancestry’s entry in Chapter 2.
Expert Strikes 5th
You’ve practiced martial arts and have now surpassed
your former skill. Your proficiency ranks for unarmed
attacks and simple weapons increase to expert.
Path to Perfection 7th
You have progressed along your own path to
enlightenment. Choose your Fortitude, Reflex, or Will
saving throw. Your proficiency rank for the chosen saving
throw increases to master. When you roll a success on the
chosen saving throw, you get a critical success instead.
Weapon Specialization 7th
You’ve learned how to inflict greater injuries with the
weapons you know best. You deal 2 additional damage
with weapons and unarmed attacks in which you are an
expert. This damage increases to 3 if you’re a master, and
4 if you’re legendary.
Metal Strikes 9th
You can adjust your body to make unarmed attacks
infused with the mystic energy of rare metals. Your
unarmed attacks are treated as cold iron and silver.
This allows you to deal more damage to a variety of
supernatural creatures, such as demons, devils, and fey.
Monk Expertise 9th
Your proficiency rank for your monk class DC increases
to expert. If you have ki spells, your proficiency rank for
spell attacks and spell DCs with the tradition of magic
you use for your ki spells increases to expert.
Second Path to Perfection 11th
You’ve learned to find perfection in every success. Choose
a different saving throw than the one you chose for your
path to perfection. Your proficiency rank for the chosen
saving throw increases to master. If you roll a success with
the chosen saving throw, you instead critically succeed.
Graceful Mastery 13th
You move with perpetual grace in battle, eluding and
turning aside blows. Your proficiency rank for unarmored
defense increases to master.
KEY TERMS
You’ll see the following key terms in many monk abilities.
Flourish: Actions with this trait are special techniques
that require too much exertion for you to perform frequently.
You can use only 1 action with the flourish trait per turn.
Incapacitation: An ability with this trait can take a
character out of the fight. But when you use an incapacitation
effect against a creature of higher level than you, you reduce
the degree of success of your attack roll by one step, and
that creature improves the degree of success of its saving
throws for that effect by one step.
Ki Spells: By tapping into a supernatural inner reserve
called ki, you can create magical effects. Certain feats grant
you special spells called ki spells, which are a type of focus
spell. It costs 1 Focus Point to cast a focus spell. When you
gain your first ki spell, you also gain a focus pool of 1 Focus
Point. You refill your focus pool during your daily preparations,
and you regain 1 Focus Point by spending 10 minutes using
the Refocus activity to meditate in order to reach inner peace.
When you first gain a ki spell, decide whether your ki
spells are divine spells or occult spells. You become trained
in spell attacks and spell DCs of that tradition.
Focus spells are automatically heightened to half your
level rounded up. Taking feats can give you more focus
spells and increase the size of your focus pool, though your
focus pool can never hold more than 3 points. The full rules
for focus spells appear on page 300.
Stance: A stance is a general combat strategy that you
enter by using an action with the stance trait, and that
you remain in for some time. A stance lasts until you get
knocked out, until its requirements (if any) are violated,
until the encounter ends, or until you enter a new stance,
whichever comes first. After you take an action that has
the stance trait, you can’t take another one for 1 round. You
can enter or be in a stance only in encounter mode.
157
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Adamantine Strikes 17th
When you focus your will into your limbs, your blows are as unyielding as the
hardest of metals. Your unarmed attacks are treated as adamantine.
Graceful Legend 17th
Your sublime movement grants you unparalleled protection and offense. Your
proficiency rank for unarmored defense increases to legendary, and your proficiency
rank for your monk class DC increases to master. If you have ki spells, your
proficiency rank for spell attack rolls and spell DCs with the tradition of magic you
use for your ki spells increases to master.
Perfected Form 19th
You have purged incompetence from your techniques. On your first Strike of your turn,
if you roll lower than 10, you can treat the attack roll as a 10. This is a fortune effect.
Monk Feats
Every level at which you gain a monk feat, select one of the following feats. You must
satisfy any prerequisites before taking the feat.
1ST LEVEL
CRANE STANCE [one-action] FEAT 1
MONK STANCE
Requirements You are unarmored.
You enter the stance of a crane, holding your arms in an imitation of a crane’s wings and
using flowing, defensive motions. You gain a +1 circumstance bonus to AC, but the only
Strikes you can make are crane wing attacks. These deal 1d6 bludgeoning damage; are in
the brawling group; and have the agile, finesse, nonlethal, and unarmed traits.
While in Crane Stance, reduce the DC for High Jump and Long Jump by 5, and when you
Leap, you can move an additional 5 feet horizontally or 2 feet vertically.
DRAGON STANCE [one-action] FEAT 1
MONK STANCE
Requirements You are unarmored.
You enter the stance of a dragon and make powerful leg strikes like a lashing dragon’s
tail. You can make dragon tail attacks that deal 1d10 bludgeoning damage. They are in the
brawling group and have the backswing, nonlethal, and unarmed traits.
While in Dragon Stance, you can ignore the first square of difficult terrain while Striding.
KI RUSH FEAT 1
MONK
You can use ki to move with extraordinary speed and make yourself harder to hit. You gain
the ki rush ki spell and a focus pool of 1 Focus Point. The rules for ki spells are summarized
in the sidebar on page 157, and the full rules for focus spells appear on page 300.
KI STRIKE FEAT 1
MONK
Your study of the flow of mystical energy allows you to harness it into your physical strikes.
You gain the ki strike ki spell and a focus pool of 1 Focus Point. The rules for ki spells are
summarized in the sidebar on page 157, and the full rules for focus spells appear on page 300.
MONASTIC WEAPONRY FEAT 1
MONK
You have trained with the traditional weaponry of your monastery or school. You gain
access to uncommon weapons that have the monk trait and become trained in simple
MONK FEATS
If you need to look up a monk
feat by name instead of by level,
use this table.
Feat Level
Abundant Step 6
Arrow Snatching 8
Brawling Focus 2
Crane Flutter 6
Crane Stance 1
Crushing Grab 2
Dancing Leaf 2
Deflect Arrow 4
Diamond Fists 18
Diamond Soul 12
Disrupt Ki 12
Dragon Roar 6
Dragon Stance 1
Elemental Fist 2
Empty Body 18
Enduring Quickness 20
Enlightened Presence 16
Flurry of Maneuvers 4
Flying Kick 4
Fuse Stance 20
Guarded Movement 4
Impossible Technique 20
Improved Knockback 12
Ironblood Stance 8
Ironblood Surge 14
Ki Blast 6
Ki Rush 1
Ki Strike 1
Knockback Strike 10
Master of Many Styles 16
Meditative Focus 12
Meditative Wellspring 18
Mixed Maneuver 8
Monastic Weaponry 1
Mountain Quake 14
Mountain Stance 1
Mountain Stronghold 6
Quivering Palm 16
Shattering Strike 16
Sleeper Hold 10
Stance Savant 12
Stand Still 4
Stunning Fist 2
Swift River 18
Tangled Forest Rake 14
Tangled Forest Stance 8
Tiger Slash 6
Tiger Stance 1
Timeless Body 14
Tongue of Sun and Moon 14
Wall Run 8
Water Step 6
Whirling Throw 6
Wholeness of Body 4
Wild Winds Gust 14
Wild Winds Initiate 8
Wind Jump 10
Winding Flow 10
Wolf Drag 6
Wolf Stance 1
3 Core Rulebook
158
Core Rulebook
MONK UNARMED ATTACKS
Some monk stances allow you to make special unarmed attacks while in those stances. These attacks are summarized here.
Attack Damage Group Traits
Crane wing 1d6 B Brawling Agile, finesse, nonlethal, unarmed
Dragon tail 1d10 B Brawling Backswing, nonlethal, unarmed
Falling stone 1d8 B Brawling Forceful, nonlethal, unarmed
Iron sweep 1d8 B Brawling Nonlethal, parry, sweep, unarmed
Lashing branch 1d8 S Brawling Agile, finesse, nonlethal, unarmed
Tiger claw 1d8 S Brawling Agile, finesse, nonlethal, unarmed
Wind crash* 1d6 S Brawling Agile, nonlethal, propulsive, unarmed
Wolf jaw 1d8 P Brawling Agile, backstabber, finesse, nonlethal, unarmed
* Wild winds stance is a ki spell, so you can find out more about wind crash on page 402.
and martial monk weapons. When your proficiency rank
for unarmed attacks increases to expert or master, your
proficiency rank for these weapons increases to expert or
master as well.
You can use melee monk weapons with any of your monk
feats or monk abilities that normally require unarmed attacks,
though not if the feat or ability requires you to use a single
specific type of attack, such as Crane Stance.
MOUNTAIN STANCE [one-action] FEAT 1
MONK STANCE
Trigger You are unarmored and touching the ground.
You enter the stance of an implacable mountain—a technique
first discovered by dwarven monks—allowing you to strike
with the weight of an avalanche. The only Strikes you can
make are falling stone unarmed attacks. These deal 1d8
bludgeoning damage; are in the brawling group; and have the
forceful, nonlethal, and unarmed traits.
While in Mountain Stance, you gain a +4 status bonus to
AC and a +2 circumstance bonus to any defenses against
being Shoved or Tripped. However, you have a Dexterity
modifier cap to your AC of +0, meaning you don’t add
your Dexterity to your AC, and your Speeds are all reduced
by 5 feet.
TIGER STANCE [one-action] FEAT 1
MONK STANCE
Requirements You are unarmored.
You enter the stance of a tiger and can
make tiger claw attacks. These deal 1d8
slashing damage; are in the brawling group; and
have the agile, finesse, nonlethal, and unarmed traits. On a
critical success with your tiger claws, if you deal damage, the
target takes 1d4 persistent bleed damage.
As long as your Speed is at least 20 feet while in Tiger
Stance, you can Step 10 feet.
WOLF STANCE [one-action] FEAT 1
MONK STANCE
Requirements You are unarmored.
You enter the stance of a wolf, low to the ground
with your hands held like fanged teeth. You can
make wolf jaw unarmed attacks. These deal 1d8
159
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
piercing damage; are in the brawling group; and have the
agile, backstabber, finesse, nonlethal, and unarmed traits.
If you’re flanking a target while in Wolf Stance, your wolf
jaw unarmed attacks also gain the trip trait.
2ND LEVEL
BRAWLING FOCUS FEAT 2
MONK
You know how to make the most of your attacks when
fighting hand-to-hand. You gain access to the critical
specialization effects of unarmed strikes in the brawling
group and weapons in the brawling group. If you have
Monastic Weaponry, you also gain the critical specialization
effects of all monk weapons in which you are trained.
CRUSHING GRAB FEAT 2
MONK
Like a powerful constrictor, you crush targets in your
unyielding grasp. When you successfully Grapple a creature,
you can deal bludgeoning damage to that creature equal to
your Strength modifier. You can make this attack nonlethal
with no penalty.
DANCING LEAF FEAT 2
MONK
You are as light as a leaf whirling in the breeze. When you
Leap or succeed at a High Jump or Long Jump, increase the
distance you jump by 5 feet. When calculating the damage
you take from falling, don’t count any distance fallen while
you are adjacent to a wall.
ELEMENTAL FIST FEAT 2
MONK
Prerequisites Ki Strike
You call upon the power of the elements, infusing your ki
with elemental energy and allowing your attacks to deal
energy damage. When you cast ki strike, in addition to the
damage types normally available, you can deliver the extra
damage in the form of a gust of storm-tossed wind (dealing
electricity damage and gaining the air trait), a chunk of
stone (dealing bludgeoning damage and gaining the earth
trait), a flickering flame (dealing fire damage), or a crashing
wave of frigid water (dealing cold damage and gaining the
water trait).
STUNNING FIST FEAT 2
MONK
Prerequisites Flurry of Blows
The focused power of your flurry threatens to overwhelm
your opponent. When you target the same creature with two
Strikes from your Flurry of Blows, you can try to stun the
creature. If either Strike hits and deals damage, the target
must succeed at a Fortitude save against your class DC or
be stunned 1 (or stunned 3 on a critical failure). This is an
incapacitation effect.
4TH LEVEL
DEFLECT ARROW [reaction] FEAT 4
MONK
Trigger You are the target of a physical ranged attack.
Requirements You’re aware of the attack, are not flat-footed
against it, and have a hand free.
You gain a +4 circumstance bonus to AC against the triggering
attack. If the attack misses, you have deflected it. You cannot
use this feat to deflect unusually massive ranged projectiles
(such as boulders or ballista bolts).
FLURRY OF MANEUVERS FEAT 4
MONK
Prerequisites expert in Athletics
You flurry is a combination of maneuvers. You can replace one
or both of your attacks during a Flurry of Blows with Grapples,
Shoves, or Trips.
FLYING KICK [two-actions] FEAT 4
MONK
You launch yourself at a foe. Make a Leap or attempt a High
Jump or Long Jump. At the end of the jump, if you’re adjacent
to a foe, you can immediately Strike that foe with an unarmed
attack, even if the foe is in mid-air. You fall to the ground after
the Strike. If the distance you fall is no more than the height of
your jump, you land upright and take no damage.
GUARDED MOVEMENT FEAT 4
MONK
Your guard is up, even while moving. You gain a +4 circumstance
bonus to AC against reactions triggered by your movement.
STAND STILL [reaction] FEAT 4
MONK
Trigger A creature within your reach uses a move action or
leaves a square during a move action it’s using.
You strike out when your foe tries to flee. Make a melee Strike
against the triggering creature. If the attack is a critical hit and
the trigger was a move action, you disrupt that action.
WHOLENESS OF BODY FEAT 4
MONK
Prerequisites ki spells
You can restore your health by tapping into your ki. You
gain the wholeness of body ki spell (page 402). Increase the
number of Focus Points in your focus pool by 1.
6TH LEVEL
ABUNDANT STEP FEAT 6
MONK
Prerequisites incredible movement, ki spells
You can teleport yourself a short distance. You gain the
abundant step ki spell (page 401). Increase the number of
Focus Points in your focus pool by 1.
3 Core Rulebook
160
Core Rulebook
CRANE FLUTTER [reaction] FEAT 6
MONK
Prerequisites Crane Stance
Trigger You are targeted with a melee attack by an attacker
you can see.
Requirements You are in Crane Stance.
You interpose your arm between yourself and your opponent.
Your circumstance bonus to AC from Crane Stance increases to
+3 against the triggering attack. If the attack misses you, you
can immediately make a crane wing Strike against the attacker
at a –2 penalty, even if the attacker isn’t within your reach.
DRAGON ROAR [one-action] FEAT 6
AUDITORY EMOTION FEAR MENTAL MONK
Prerequisites Dragon Stance
Requirements You are in Dragon Stance.
You bellow, instilling fear in your enemies. Enemies within a
15-foot emanation must succeed at a Will save against your
Intimidation DC or be frightened 1 (frightened 2 on a critical
failure). When a creature frightened by the roar begins its turn
adjacent to you, it can’t reduce its frightened value below 1
on that turn. Your first attack that hits a frightened creature
after you roar and before the end of your next turn gains a
+4 circumstance bonus to damage.
After you use Dragon Roar, you can’t use it again for 1d4 rounds.
Its effects end immediately if you leave Dragon Stance. Creatures
in the area of your roar are then temporarily immune for 1 minute.
KI BLAST FEAT 6
MONK
Prerequisites ki spells
You can unleash an impactful cone of force by channeling
your ki. You gain the ki blast ki spell (page 401). Increase the
number of Focus Points in your focus pool by 1.
MOUNTAIN STRONGHOLD [one-action] FEAT 6
MONK
Prerequisites Mountain Stance
Requirements You are in Mountain Stance.
You focus on your connection to the earth and call upon
the mountain to block attacks against you. You gain a +2
circumstance bonus to AC until the beginning of your next turn.
Special If you have this feat, the Dexterity modifier cap to
your AC while you’re in Mountain Stance increases from +0 to +1.
TIGER SLASH [two-actions] FEAT 6
MONK
Prerequisites Tiger Stance
161
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SAMPLE MONK Requirements You are in Tiger Stance.
You make a fierce swipe with both hands. Make a tiger claw
Strike. It deals two extra weapon damage dice (three extra
dice if you’re 14th level or higher), and you can push the
target 5 feet away as if you had successfully Shoved them.
If the attack is a critical success and deals damage, add your
Strength modifier to the persistent bleed damage from your
tiger claw.
WATER STEP FEAT 6
MONK
You can Stride across liquid and surfaces that don’t support
your weight. This benefit lasts only during your movement. If
you end your movement on a surface that can’t support you,
you fall in or it collapses as normal.
WHIRLING THROW [one-action] FEAT 6
MONK
Requirements You have a creature grabbed or restrained.
You propel your grabbed or restrained foe a great distance.
You can throw the creature any distance up to 10 feet, plus
5 feet × your Strength modifier. If you successfully throw the
creature, it takes bludgeoning damage equal to your Strength
modifier plus 1d6 per 10 feet you threw it.
Attempt an Athletics check against the foe’s Fortitude DC. You
take a –2 circumstance penalty to your check if the target is one
size larger than you and a –4 circumstance penalty if it’s larger
than that. You gain a +2 circumstance bonus to your check if the
target is one size smaller than you and a +4 circumstance bonus
if it’s smaller than that.
Critical Success You throw the creature the desired distance
and it lands prone.
Success You throw the creature the desired distance.
Failure You don’t throw the creature.
Critical Failure You don’t throw the creature, and it’s no longer
grabbed or restrained by you.
WOLF DRAG [two-actions] FEAT 6
MONK
Prerequisites Wolf Stance
Requirements You are in Wolf Stance.
You rip your enemy off their feet. Make a wolf jaw Strike. Your
wolf jaw gains the fatal d12 trait for this Strike, and if the attack
succeeds, you knock the target prone.
8TH LEVEL
ARROW SNATCHING FEAT 8
MONK
Prerequisite Deflect Arrow
You pluck missiles from the air and hurl them back at their
source. When you successfully deflect an attack with Deflect
Arrow, as part of that reaction, you can immediately make a
ranged Strike against the attacker using the projectile you
deflected. This is a thrown weapon with the same range
increment and effect on a hit as the triggering attack.
KI MONK
Centering yourself, you call forth the internal magical
energy that dwells within all living things. This ki
can empower your body or flash out as pure energy.
ABILITY SCORES
Prioritize Strength. Wisdom empowers your ki spells,
Perception, and Will saves. Constitution and Dexterity
help your physical defenses.
SKILLS
Acrobatics, Athletics, Occultism, Stealth
STARTING FEAT
Ki Strike (occult)
HIGHER-LEVEL FEATS
Mountain Stance (1st), Elemental Fist (2nd), Wholeness
of Body (4th), Ki Blast (6th), Meditative Focus (12th),
Quivering Palm (16th), Empty Body (20th)
3 Core Rulebook
162
Core Rulebook
IRONBLOOD STANCE [one-action] FEAT 8
MONK STANCE
Requirements You are unarmored.
You enter the stance of impenetrable iron, refusing to yield to
any blow. You can make iron sweep unarmed attacks. These
deal 1d8 bludgeoning damage; are in the brawling group; and
have the nonlethal, parry, sweep, and unarmed traits.
While in Ironblood Stance, you gain resistance 2 to all
damage. The resistance increases to 3 at 12th level, to 4 at
16th level, and to 5 at 20th level.
MIXED MANEUVER [two-actions] FEAT 8
MONK
Prerequisite master in Athletics
You combine two different maneuvers together into a single
flowing whole. Choose any two of Grapple, Shove, and Trip.
Attempt both of the attacks you chose against the same or
different creatures, but don’t apply the multiple attack penalty
until after resolving both attacks.
TANGLED FOREST STANCE [one-action] FEAT 8
MONK STANCE
Trigger You are unarmored.
You extend your arms like gnarled branches to interfere
with your foes’ movements. You can make lashing branch
unarmed attacks. These deal 1d8 slashing damage; are in the
brawling group; and have the agile, finesse, nonlethal, and
unarmed traits.
While you’re in Tangled Forest Stance and can act, every
enemy in your reach that tries to move away from you must
succeed at a Reflex save, Acrobatics check, or Athletics check
against your class DC or be immobilized for that action. If you
prefer, you can allow the enemy to move.
WALL RUN [one-action] FEAT 8
MONK
You defy gravity, traversing vertical planes as easily as
the ground. Stride up to your Speed. You must start your
movement on a horizontal surface. During this movement,
you can run up vertical surfaces, like walls, at your full
Speed. If you end the Stride off the ground, you fall after
taking your next action or when your turn ends, whichever
comes first (though you can Grab an Edge, if applicable). If
you have Water Step or a similar ability, Wall Run lets you
run along flimsy vertical surfaces, as well as vertical liquids,
such as a waterfall.
WILD WINDS INITIATE FEAT 8
MONK
Prerequisites ki spells
You learn a mystical stance that lets you attack from a
distance. You gain the wild winds stance ki spell (page 402).
Increase the number of Focus Points in your focus pool by 1.
While entering the stance is a ki spell, the wind crash Strikes
the stance grants are not, so you can use them as often as you
like while in the stance.
10TH LEVEL
KNOCKBACK STRIKE [two-actions] FEAT 10
CONCENTRATE MONK
You focus your strength into a blow powerful enough to push
an enemy away from you. Make an unarmed Strike. If you hit,
attempt an Athletics check to Shove the target. This attack
uses the same multiple attack penalty as your Strike, and
doesn’t count toward your multiple attack penalty.
SLEEPER HOLD [one-action] FEAT 10
ATTACK INCAPACITATION MONK
Requirements You have a creature grabbed or restrained.
You pinch crucial points of your target’s nervous system,
impeding its ability to function. Attempt an Athletics check to
Grapple the creature, with the following success and critical
success effects instead of the usual effects.
Critical Success The target falls unconscious for 1 minute,
though it remains standing and doesn’t drop what it holds.
Success The target is clumsy 1 until the end of its next turn.
WIND JUMP FEAT 10
MONK
Prerequisites ki spells
You gather the wind beneath you, allowing you to soar as you
jump. You gain the wind jump ki spell (page 402). Increase the
number of Focus Points in your focus pool by 1.
WINDING FLOW [one-action] FEAT 10
MONK
Frequency once per round
Any journey consists of more than simply reaching your
destination. You use two of the following actions in any order:
Stand, Step, and Stride. You can’t use the same action twice.
12TH LEVEL
DIAMOND SOUL FEAT 12
MONK
You have fortified your body and mind against eldritch effects.
You gain a +1 status bonus to saving throws against magic.
DISRUPT KI [two-actions] FEAT 12
MONK NEGATIVE
Make an unarmed Strike. If it deals damage to a living creature,
you block that creature’s inner life force. The creature takes
2d6 persistent negative damage and is enfeebled 1 until the
persistent damage ends. If you’re 18th level or higher, this
deals 3d6 persistent negative damage instead.
IMPROVED KNOCKBACK FEAT 12
MONK
Prerequisites master in Athletics
When you successfully Shove a creature, increase both the
distance you can push the creature and the distance you can
move to follow along with the target by 5 feet on a success
163
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SAMPLE MONK or 10 feet on a critical success. If you push the target into an
obstacle, it takes bludgeoning damage equal to 6 plus your
Strength modifier, or 8 plus your Strength modifier if you have
legendary proficiency in Athletics.
MEDITATIVE FOCUS FEAT 12
MONK
Prerequisites ki spells
Your meditation is so effective that you can achieve a
deep focus. If you have spent at least 2 Focus Points since
the last time you Refocused, you recover 2 Focus Points when
you Refocus instead of 1.
STANCE SAVANT [reaction] FEAT 12
MONK
Trigger You roll initiative.
You enter a stance without a thought. Use an action that has
the stance trait.
14TH LEVEL
IRONBLOOD SURGE [one-action] FEAT 14
MONK
Prerequisites Ironblood Stance
Requirements You are in Ironblood Stance.
You steel yourself, preparing to resist oncoming attacks and
using your muscles to absorb the impact. You gain the benefits
of your iron sweep’s parry trait (a +1 circumstance bonus to
AC until the start of your next turn) and your resistance from
Ironblood Stance increases to your Strength modifier (if it’s
higher) for the same duration.
MOUNTAIN QUAKE [one-action] FEAT 14
MONK
Prerequisites Mountain Stronghold
Requirements You are in Mountain Stance.
You stomp, shaking the earth beneath you. Creatures on the
ground within a 20-foot emanation take damage equal to your
Strength modifier (minimum 0), which they can resist with a
basic Fortitude save. On a failure, they also fall prone. After
you use this action, you can’t use it again for 1d4 rounds.
Special If you have this feat, the Dexterity modifier cap to
your AC while using Mountain Stance increases from +1 to +2.
TANGLED FOREST RAKE [one-action] FEAT 14
MONK
Prerequisites Tangled Forest Stance
Requirements You are in Tangled Forest Stance.
You reposition foes with raking attacks. Make a lashing branch
Strike. If you hit and deal damage, you force the target to move
5 feet into a space within your reach. This follows the forced
movement rules found on page 475.
TIMELESS BODY FEAT 14
MONK
You cease aging. In addition, you gain a +2 status bonus to
CRANE MONK
Striving for grace in all things, you mimic the fluid
movements of the crane. Your strikes are quick as
the wind and your mind clear as a placid pool.
ABILITY SCORES
Prioritize Dexterity for finesse attacks and high defenses.
A good Wisdom lets you perceive dangers and act
quickly, and Constitution improves your hardiness.
SKILLS
Acrobatics, Nature, Religion, Stealth
STARTING FEAT
Crane Stance
HIGHER-LEVEL FEATS
Dancing Leaf (2nd), Flying Kick (4th), Crane Flutter (6th),
Winding Flow (10th), Stance Savant (12th), Enduring
Quickness (20th)
3 Core Rulebook
164
Core Rulebook
saving throws against poisons and diseases, and you gain
resistance to poison damage equal to half your level.
TONGUE OF SUN AND MOON FEAT 14
MONK
You have transcended the barriers between words and
meaning. You can speak and understand all spoken languages.
WILD WINDS GUST [two-actions] FEAT 14
AIR CONCENTRATE EVOCATION MANIPULATE MONK
Prerequisites Wild Winds Initiate
Requirements You are in wild winds stance.
You store up energy and release it in an enormous gust
of rushing wind. Make a wind crash Strike against each
creature in your choice of a 30-foot cone or a 60 foot line.
These attacks all count toward your multiple attack penalty,
but the penalty doesn’t increase until after you make all
the attacks.
16TH LEVEL
ENLIGHTENED PRESENCE FEAT 16
EMOTION MENTAL MONK
You exude an aura of resolve. You and allies within 15 feet
of you gain a +2 status bonus to Will saving throws against
mental effects.
MASTER OF MANY STYLES [free-action] FEAT 16
MONK
Prerequisites Stance Savant
Requirements This is the first action of your turn.
You move between stances in an unceasing dance. You use an
action with the stance trait.
QUIVERING PALM FEAT 16
MONK
Prerequisites ki spells
Your strikes can kill foes. You gain the quivering palm ki spell
(page 401). Increase the number of Focus Points in your focus
pool by 1.
SHATTERING STRIKE [two-actions] FEAT 16
MONK
The force of your considered blow shatters objects and
defenses alike. Make an unarmed Strike. It bypasses the
target’s resistances. If the target has Hardness, the Strike
treats the Hardness as if it were half its value.
18TH LEVEL
DIAMOND FISTS FEAT 18
MONK
Your body hardens as you combine your attacks, making
your finishing blows more damaging. Your unarmed attacks
gain the forceful trait. Any that already had this trait instead
increase their weapon damage dice by one step.
EMPTY BODY FEAT 18
MONK
Prerequisites ki spells
You transmute your body into an ethereal form. You gain the
empty body ki spell (page 401). Increase the number of Focus
Points in your focus pool by 1.
MEDITATIVE WELLSPRING FEAT 18
MONK
Prerequisites Meditative Focus
When you clear your mind, your focus comes flowing back in a
powerful rush. If you have spent at least 3 Focus Points since
the last time you Refocused, you recover 3 Focus Points when
you Refocus instead of 1.
SWIFT RIVER [free-action] FEAT 18
MONK
Trigger Your turn ends and you have a status penalty to your
Speed or are immobilized or slowed.
You flow like water, avoiding all restraints. End one status
penalty to your speed, or end one immobilized or slowed
condition affecting you.
20TH LEVEL
ENDURING QUICKNESS FEAT 20
MONK
You move as fast and as high as the wind itself. You’re
permanently quickened. You can use your extra action to
Stride or Leap, or to provide one of the actions needed for a
High Jump or Long Jump.
FUSE STANCE FEAT 20
MONK
Prerequisites at least two stances
You have combined two stances into a single stance all your
own. When you take this feat, choose two stances you know
and combine them into a single fused stance. Give your new
fused stance a unique name. When you enter your fused
stance, you gain all the effects of both stances, including the
requirements and restrictions.
You can’t fuse stances with fundamentally incompatible
requirements or restrictions (such as Ironblood Stance
and Crane Stance, which both require using only one type
of Strike).
IMPOSSIBLE TECHNIQUE [reaction] FEAT 20
FORTUNE MONK
Trigger An enemy’s attack hits you or you fail a saving throw
against an enemy’s ability.
Requirements You are not armored or fatigued.
You execute a maneuver that defies possibility. If the triggering
effect was an enemy’s attack hitting you, the enemy rerolls
the attack roll and uses the lower result. If the triggering
effect was you failing a saving throw, you reroll the saving
throw and use the higher result.
165
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Core Rulebook
166
During combat encounters...
You can single out particular foes to hunt, making you better at defeating them.
You target and brutalize your chosen foe with either a bow or melee weapons, while
supporting your allies with your skills.
During social encounters...
When you speak, it’s with the voice of practical experience, especially involving
wilderness exploration.
While exploring...
You guide your allies through the wilderness or follow tracks. You keep an eye out
for trouble, constantly alert for danger even when it’s not overt.
In downtime...
You craft weapons and snares in preparation for your next venture. If you prefer to
get outside, you might go on hunts or scout nearby areas to better understand your
environment.
You Might...
• Respect the raw power of nature and understand how to make the best of
its bounty.
• Enjoy the thrill of the hunt.
• Scout out ahead of the party, reconnoitering dangers before combat begins.
Others Probably...
• Call upon you to protect them from the wilds or the encroachment of civilization.
• Expect you to be a quiet or taciturn loner.
• Think there is something dangerous and wild about you.
INITIAL PROFICIENCIES
At 1st level, you gain the
listed proficiency ranks in
the following statistics. You
are untrained in anything
not listed unless you gain a
better proficiency rank in some
other way.
PERCEPTION
Expert in Perception
SAVING THROWS
Expert in Fortitude
Expert in Reflex
Trained in Will
SKILLS
Trained in Nature
Trained in Survival
Trained in a number of additional
skills equal to 4  plus your
Intelligence modifier
ATTACKS
Trained in simple weapons
Trained in martial weapons
Trained in unarmed attacks
DEFENSES
Trained in light armor
Trained in medium armor
Trained in unarmored defense
CLASS DC
Trained in ranger class DC
Some rangers believe civilization wears down the soul, but still needs to be
protected from wild creatures. Others say nature needs to be protected from
the greedy, who wish to tame its beauty and plunder its treasures. You could
champion either goal, or both. You might be a scout, tracker, or hunter of fugitives or beasts,
haunting the edge of civilization or exploring the wilds. You know how to live off the land and
are skilled at spotting and taking down both opportune prey and hated enemies.
Ranger
KEY ABILITY
STRENGTH OR DEXTERITY
At 1st level, your class gives you
an ability boost to your choice of
Strength or Dexterity.
HIT POINTS
10 + your Constitution modifier
You increase your maximum number of
HP by this number at 1st level and every
level thereafter.
CLASSES 3
167
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
TABLE 3–14: RANGER ADVANCEMENT
Your
Level Class Features
1 Ancestry and background, initial proficiencies, hunt
prey, hunter’s edge, ranger feat
2 Ranger feat, skill feat
3 General feat, iron will, skill increase
4 Ranger feat, skill feat
5 Ability boosts, ancestry feat, skill increase,
trackless step, weapon expertise
6 Ranger feat, skill feat
7 Evasion, general feat, skill increase, vigilant senses,
weapon specialization
8 Ranger feat, skill feat
9 Ancestry feat, nature’s edge, ranger expertise,
skill increase
10 Ability boosts, ranger feat, skill feat
11 General feat, juggernaut, medium armor expertise,
skill increase, wild stride
12 Ranger feat, skill feat
13 Ancestry feat, skill increase, weapon mastery
14 Ranger feat, skill feat
15 Ability boosts, general feat, greater weapon
specialization, improved evasion, incredible senses,
skill increase
16 Ranger feat, skill feat
17 Ancestry feat, masterful hunter, skill increase
18 Ranger feat, skill feat
19 General feat, second skin, skill increase, swift prey
20 Ability boosts, ranger feat, skill feat
Class Features
You gain these abilities as a ranger. Abilities gained at
higher levels list the level at which you gain them next to
the features’ names.
Ancestry and Background
In addition to what you get from your class at 1st level,
you have the benefits of your selected ancestry and
background, as described in Chapter 2.
Initial Proficiencies
At 1st level, you gain a number of proficiencies that
represent your basic training. These proficiencies are
noted at the start of this class.
Hunt Prey
When you focus your attention on a single foe, you become
unstoppable in your pursuit. You gain the Hunt Prey action.
HUNT PREY [one-action]
CONCENTRATE RANGER
You designate a single creature as your prey and focus your
attacks against that creature. You must be able to see or hear
the prey, or you must be tracking the prey during exploration.
You gain a +2 circumstance bonus to Perception checks
when you Seek your prey and a +2 circumstance bonus to
Survival checks when you Track your prey. You also ignore the
penalty for making ranged attacks within your second range
increment against the prey you’re hunting.
You can have only one creature designated as your prey
at a time. If you use Hunt Prey against a creature when you
already have a creature designated, the prior creature loses
the designation and the new prey gains the designation. Your
designation lasts until your next daily preparations.
Hunter’s Edge
You have trained for countless hours to become a more
skilled hunter and tracker, gaining an additional benefit
when you Hunt Prey depending on the focus of your
training. Choose a hunter’s edge.
Flurry: You have trained to unleash a devastating flurry
of attacks upon your prey. Your multiple attack penalty
for attacks against your hunted prey is –3 (–2 with an
agile weapon) on your second attack of the turn instead
of –5, and –6 (–4 with an agile weapon) on your third or
subsequent attack of the turn, instead of –10.
Precision: You have trained to aim for your prey’s weak
points. The first time you hit your hunted prey in a round,
you also deal 1d8 additional precision damage. (Precision
damage increases the damage you already deal, using the
same type, but is ineffective against creatures that lack vital
organs or weak points.) At 11th level, the extra damage
increases to 2d8 precision damage, and at 19th level, the
extra damage increases to 3d8 precision damage.
Outwit: You are talented at outwitting and evading
your prey. You gain a +2 circumstance bonus to Deception
checks, Intimidation checks, Stealth checks, and any checks
to Recall Knowledge about the prey, and a +1 circumstance
bonus to AC against your prey’s attacks.
Ranger Feats
At 1st level and every even-numbered level, you gain a ranger
class feat. Ranger feats are listed beginning on page 170.
Skill Feats 2nd
At 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a skill
feat. Skill feats appear in Chapter 5 and have the skill
trait. You must be trained or better in the corresponding
skill to select a skill feat.
General Feats 3rd
At 3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter, you gain a
general feat. General feats are listed in Chapter 5.
Iron Will 3rd
Your training has hardened your resolve. Your proficiency
rank for Will saves increases to expert.
Skill Increases 3rd
At 3rd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a
Core Rulebook
168
skill increase. You can use this increase to either become
trained in one skill, or become an expert in one skill in
which you’re already trained.
At 7th level, you can use skill increases to become a
master in a skill in which you’re already an expert, and
at 15th level, you can use them to become legendary in a
skill in which you’re already a master.
Ability Boosts 5th
At 5th level and every 5 levels thereafter, you boost four
different ability scores. You can use these ability boosts to
increase your ability scores above 18. Boosting an ability
score increases it by 1 if it’s already 18 or above, or by 2
if it starts out below 18.
Ancestry Feats 5th
In addition to the ancestry feat you started with, you gain
an ancestry feat at 5th level and every 4 levels thereafter.
The list of ancestry feats available to you can be found in
your ancestry’s entry in Chapter 2.
Trackless Step 5th
When you move through natural terrains, you are difficult
to track. You always gain the benefits of the Cover Tracks
action in such terrains, without moving at half your Speed.
Weapon Expertise 5th
You’ve dedicated yourself to learning the intricacies of
your weapons. Your proficiency ranks for simple and
martial weapons increases to expert. You gain access to
the critical specialization effects of all simple and martial
weapons when attacking your hunted prey.
Evasion 7th
You’ve learned to move quickly to avoid explosions,
dragons’ breath, and worse. Your proficiency rank for
Reflex saves increases to master. When you roll a success
on a Reflex save, you get a critical success instead.
Vigilant Senses 7th
Through your adventuring, you’ve developed keen
awareness and attention to detail. Your proficiency rank
for Perception increases to master.
Weapon Specialization 7th
You’ve learned how to inflict greater injuries with the
weapons you know best. You deal 2 additional damage with
weapons and unarmed attacks in which you are an expert.
This damage increases to 3 if you’re a master, and to 4 if
you’re legendary.
Nature’s Edge 9th
You always find the weak points in your foes’ defenses when
they’re on unfavorable terrain. Enemies are flat-footed to
you if they’re in natural difficult terrain, on natural uneven
ground, or in difficult terrain resulting from a snare.
Ranger Expertise 9th
You’ve practiced your techniques to make them harder
to resist. Your proficiency rank for your ranger class DC
increases to expert.
Juggernaut 11th
Your body is accustomed to physical hardship and
resistant to ailments. Your proficiency rank for Fortitude
saves increases to master. When you roll a success on a
Fortitude save, you get a critical success instead.
Medium Armor Expertise 11th
You’ve learned to defend yourself better against attacks.
Your proficiency ranks for light armor, medium armor,
and unarmored defense increase to expert.
Wild Stride 11th
You move quickly through obstacles, whether they’re
tumbled stone, tangled undergrowth, or sucking mud.
You can ignore the effects of non-magical difficult
terrain. As normal for ignoring difficult terrain, this also
lets you treat the hindrances of greater difficult terrain
as those of difficult terrain.
Weapon Mastery 13th
You fully understand the intricacies of your weapons.
Your proficiency ranks for simple and martial weapons
increase to master.
Greater Weapon Specialization 15th
Your damage from weapon specialization increases to 4
with weapons and unarmed attacks in which you’re an
expert, 6 if you’re a master, and 8 if you’re legendary.
KEY TERMS
You’ll see these key terms in many ranger class features.
Flourish: Actions with this trait are special techniques
that require too much exertion for you to perform
frequently. You can use only 1 action with the flourish trait
per turn.
Open: These maneuvers work only as the first salvo in
the attacks you make on your turn. You can use an action
with the open trait only if you haven’t used an action
with the attack or open trait yet this turn.
Press: Actions with this trait allow you to follow up earlier
attacks. An action with the press trait can be used only if
you are currently affected by a multiple attack penalty.
Some actions with the press trait also grant an effect
on a failure. The effects that are added on a failure don’t
apply on a critical failure. If your press action succeeds,
you can choose to apply the failure effect instead. (For
example, you may wish to do this when an attack deals
no damage due to resistance.) Because a press action
requires a multiple attack penalty, you can’t use one when
it’s not your turn, even if you use the Ready activity.
169
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Improved Evasion 15th
Your ability to elude danger is matchless. Your proficiency rank for Reflex saves increases
to legendary. When you roll a critical failure on a Reflex save, you get a failure instead.
When you fail a Reflex save against a damaging effect, you take half damage.
Incredible Senses 15th
You notice things almost impossible for an ordinary person to detect. Your proficiency
rank for Perception increases to legendary.
Masterful Hunter 17th
You have honed your abilities as a hunter to incredible levels. Your proficiency rank
for your ranger class DC increases to master. When using a ranged weapon that you
have master proficiency in, you can ignore the penalty if attacking your hunted prey
within the weapon’s second and third range increments.
If you have master proficiency in Perception, you gain a +4 circumstance bonus to
Perception checks when you Seek your prey, and if you have master proficiency in
Survival, you gain a +4 circumstance bonus to Survival checks when you Track your prey.
You also gain an additional benefit depending on your hunter’s edge.
Flurry: You can blend your weapon mastery with skillful targeting to make a
series of precise attacks. If you have master proficiency with your weapon, your
multiple attack penalty for attacks against your hunted prey is –2 (–1 with an agile
weapon) on your second attack of the turn, and –4 (–2 with an agile weapon) on
your third and subsequent attacks of the turn.
Precision: Your weapon mastery allows you to hit your prey’s vital areas multiple
times. The second time in a round you hit your hunted prey, you also deal 1d8
precision damage. At 19th level, your second hit in a round against your hunted prey
deals 2d8 precision damage, and your third hit in a round against your hunted prey
deals 1d8 precision damage.
Outwit: Your mastery of skills allows you to overwhelm your prey. If you have
master proficiency in Deception, Intimidation, Stealth, or the skill you use to Recall
Knowledge about your prey, increase the circumstance bonus against the prey with
that skill from +2 to +4. If you have master proficiency with your armor, increase the
circumstance bonus to AC against the prey from +1 to +2.
Second Skin 19th
Your armor has become akin to a second skin for you. Your proficiency ranks
for light armor, medium armor, and unarmored defense increase to master. When
wearing light or medium armor, you can rest normally, rather than receiving poor
rest that leaves you fatigued.
Swift Prey 19th
You size up your prey with only a glance. You can use Hunt Prey as a free action if
it’s your first action of your turn.
Ranger Feats
At every level that you gain a ranger feat, you can select one of the following. You must
satisfy any prerequisites before taking the feat.
1ST LEVEL
ANIMAL COMPANION FEAT 1
RANGER
You gain the service of a young animal companion that travels with you and obeys simple
commands as best as it can. See Animal Companions on page 214. When you Hunt Prey, your
animal companion gains the action’s benefits and your hunter’s edge benefit if you have one.
RANGER FEATS
If you need to look up a ranger
feat by name instead of by level,
use this table.
Feat Level
Animal Companion 1
Blind-Fight 8
Camouflage 10
Companion’s Cry 4
Crossbow Ace 1
Deadly Aim 8
Disrupt Prey 4
Distracting Shot 12
Double Prey 12
Far Shot 4
Favored Enemy 4
Favored Terrain 2
Greater Distracting Shot 16
Hazard Finder 8
Hunted Shot 1
Hunter’s Aim 2
Impossible Flurry 18
Impossible Volley 18
Improved Twin Riposte 16
Incredible Companion 10
Legendary Monster Hunter 16
Legendary Shot 20
Lightning Snares 12
Manifold Edge 18
Master Monster Hunter 10
Masterful Companion 18
Mature Animal Companion 6
Monster Hunter 1
Monster Warden 2
Penetrating Shot 10
Perfect Shot 18
Powerful Snares 8
Quick Draw 2
Quick Snares 6
Running Reload 4
Scout’s Warning 4
Second Sting 12
Sense the Unseen 14
Shadow Hunter 18
Shared Prey 14
Side by Side 12
Skirmish Strike 6
Snap Shot 6
Snare Specialist 4
Specialized Companion 16
Stealthy Companion 14
Swift Tracker 6
Targeting Shot 14
Terrain Master 8
To the Ends of the Earth 20
Triple Threat 20
Twin Parry 4
Twin Riposte 10
Twin Takedown 1
Ubiquitous Snares 16
Ultimate Skirmisher 20
Warden’s Boon 8
Warden’s Guidance 14
Warden’s Step 10
Wild Empathy 2
Core Rulebook
170
CROSSBOW ACE FEAT 1
RANGER
You have a deep understanding of the crossbow. When you’re
wielding a crossbow and use Hunt Prey or use Interact to
reload your crossbow, you gain a +2 circumstance bonus to
the damage roll on your next Strike with that crossbow. If the
crossbow is a simple crossbow, also increase the damage die
size for that attack by one step (page 279). You must make
the attack before the end of your next turn or these benefits
are lost.
HUNTED SHOT [one-action] FEAT 1
FLOURISH RANGER
Frequency once per round
Requirement You are wielding a ranged weapon with reload 0.
You take two quick shots against the one you hunt. Make two
Strikes against your prey with the required weapon. If both
hit the same creature, combine their damage for the purpose
of resistances and weaknesses. Apply your multiple attack
penalty to each Strike normally.
MONSTER HUNTER FEAT 1
RANGER
You swiftly assess your prey and apply what you know.
As part of the action used to Hunt your Prey, you can
attempt a check to Recall Knowledge about your prey.
When you critically succeed at identifying your hunted
prey with Recall Knowledge, you note a weakness in the
creature’s defenses. You and allies you tell gain
a +1 circumstance bonus to your next attack
roll against that prey. You can give bonuses
from Monster Hunter only once per day against a
particular creature.
TWIN TAKEDOWN [one-action] FEAT 1
FLOURISH RANGER
Frequency once per round
Requirement You are wielding two melee weapons,
each in a different hand.
You swiftly attack your hunted prey with both
weapons. Make two Strikes against your
hunted prey, one with each of the required
weapons. If both hit the same hunted prey,
combine their damage for the purpose of
its resistances and weaknesses. Apply your multiple
attack penalty to each Strike normally.
2ND LEVEL
FAVORED TERRAIN FEAT 2
RANGER
You have studied a specific terrain to overcome
its challenges. Choose aquatic, arctic, desert, forest,
mountain, plains, sky, swamp, or underground as
your favored terrain. When in that terrain, you can
ignore the effects of non-magical difficult  terrain.
If  you have the wild stride class feature, you gain a
second benefit while in your favored terrain, depending on
your choice.
• Aquatic You gain a swim Speed equal to your Speed. If
you already had a swim Speed, you gain a +10-foot status
bonus to your swim Speed.
• Arctic You need to eat and drink only one-tenth as much
as usual, you aren’t affected by severe or extreme cold,
and you can walk across ice and snow at full Speed
without needing to Balance.
• Desert You need to eat and drink only one-tenth as
much as usual, you aren’t affected by severe or extreme
heat, and you can walk along sand at full Speed without
needing to Balance.
• Forest, Mountain, or Underground You gain a climb Speed
equal to your Speed. If you already had a climb Speed,
you gain a +10-foot status bonus to your climb Speed.
• Plains You gain a +10-foot status bonus to your land Speed.
• Sky You gain a +10-foot status bonus to your fly Speed, if
you have one.
171
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Swamp You can move across bogs at full Speed, even if
they are deep enough to be greater difficult terrain or to
normally require you to Swim.
HUNTER’S AIM [two-actions] FEAT 2
CONCENTRATE RANGER
When you focus on aiming, your attack becomes particularly
accurate. Make a ranged weapon Strike against your hunted
prey. On this Strike, you gain a +2 circumstance bonus to the
attack roll and ignore your prey’s concealed condition.
MONSTER WARDEN FEAT 2
RANGER
Prerequisites Monster Hunter
You understand how to defend yourself and others against
your prey. When you grant bonuses from Monster Hunter,
you and your allies also each gain a +1 circumstance
bonus to your next saving throw against that particular
creature and to your AC against that creature’s next attack
against you.
QUICK DRAW [one-action] FEAT 2
RANGER
You draw your weapon and attack with the same motion. You
Interact to draw a weapon, then Strike with that weapon.
WILD EMPATHY FEAT 2
RANGER
You have a connection to the creatures of the natural
world that allows you to communicate with them on
a rudimentary level. You can use Diplomacy to Make an
Impression on animals and to make very simple Requests
of them. In most cases, wild animals will give you time to
make your case.
4TH LEVEL
COMPANION’S CRY FEAT 4
RANGER
Prerequisites an animal companion
You can urge your companion to do its utmost. You can
spend 2 actions to Command an Animal instead of 1 when
commanding your animal companion. If you do, your animal
companion uses an additional action.
DISRUPT PREY [free-action] FEAT 4
RANGER
Trigger Your hunted prey is within your reach, and it uses a
manipulate action, uses a move action, or leaves a square
during a move action it’s using.
Make a melee Strike against your prey. If the attack is a critical
hit, you disrupt the triggering action.
FAR SHOT FEAT 4
RANGER
Your experience in the field has taught you how to focus
your aim at a distance, increasing your accuracy. Double
your weapons’ range increments.
FAVORED ENEMY FEAT 4
RANGER
You have studied a specific type of wild creature and can
hunt it more easily. When you gain this feat, choose animals,
beasts, dragons, or both fungi and plants as your favored
enemy. When you roll initiative and can see an enemy that
belongs to the chosen category, you can Hunt Prey as a free
action, designating that enemy.
You can use this free action even if you haven’t identified
the creature yet with Recall Knowledge. The benefit doesn’t
apply against favored enemies disguised as other creatures,
and the GM determines whether it applies against a creature
disguised as a favored enemy.
RUNNING RELOAD [one-action] FEAT 4
RANGER
You can reload your weapon on the move. You Stride, Step, or
Sneak, then Interact to reload.
SCOUT’S WARNING [free-action] FEAT 4
RANGER
Trigger You are about to roll a Perception or Survival check
for initiative.
You visually or audibly warn your allies of danger, granting
them each a +1 circumstance bonus to their initiative rolls.
Depending on whether you use gestures or call out, this action
gains either the visual or the auditory trait, respectively.
SNARE SPECIALIST FEAT 4
RANGER
Prerequisites expert in Crafting, Snare Crafting
You specialize in creating quick traps to obstruct your enemies
on the battlefield. If your proficiency rank in Crafting is expert,
you gain the formulas for three common or uncommon snares
(page 589). If your rank is master, you gain 6. If your rank is
legendary, you gain 9.
Each day during your daily preparations, you can prepare
four snares from your formula book for quick deployment; if
they normally take 1 minute to Craft, you can Craft them with
3 Interact actions. The number of snares increases to six if
you have master proficiency in Crafting and eight if you have
legendary proficiency in Crafting. Snares prepared in this way
don’t cost you any resources to Craft.
TWIN PARRY [one-action] FEAT 4
RANGER
Requirements You are wielding two melee weapons, one in
each hand.
You can use two weapons to deflect attacks. You gain a +1
circumstance bonus to AC until the start of your next turn,
or a +2 circumstance bonus if either weapon has the parry
trait. You lose this circumstance bonus if you no longer meet
this feat’s requirement.
Core Rulebook
172
6TH LEVEL
MATURE ANIMAL COMPANION FEAT 6
RANGER
Prerequisites Animal Companion
Your animal companion grows up, becoming a mature animal
companion and gaining additional capabilities (page 214).
If you have the Hunt Prey action, your animal companion
assaults the prey even without your orders. During an
encounter, even if you don’t use the Command an Animal
action, your animal companion can still use 1 action that round
on your turn to Stride toward or Strike your prey.
QUICK SNARES FEAT 6
RANGER
Prerequisites expert in Crafting, Snare Specialist
You can rig a snare in only moments. You can Craft snares that
normally take 1 minute to Craft with 3 Interact actions, even if
you haven’t prepared them.
SKIRMISH STRIKE [one-action] FEAT 6
FLOURISH RANGER
Your feet and weapon move in tandem. Either Step and then
Strike, or Strike and then Step.
SNAP SHOT FEAT 6
RANGER
You’ve learned to react with ranged weapons when a creature
is in close quarters. You can use a reaction that normally allows
you to make a melee weapon Strike to instead make a ranged
weapon Strike. You must be Striking an adjacent target. If
necessary for the reaction’s trigger, you treat your ranged
weapon as if it had a reach of 5 feet. If the reaction has other
requirements, such as wielding a specific kind of weapon, Snap
Shot doesn’t allow you to ignore them; it allows you only to
replace a melee weapon Strike with a ranged weapon Strike.
SWIFT TRACKER FEAT 6
RANGER
Prerequisites expert in Survival, Experienced Tracker
Your keen eyes catch signs of passage even when you’re moving.
You can move at your full Speed while you Track. If you have
master proficiency in Survival, you don’t need to attempt a new
Survival check every hour while Tracking. If you have legendary
proficiency in Survival, you can use another exploration activity
while Tracking.
If you roll Survival for initiative while tracking your hunted
prey, when you start your first turn of the encounter, you can
Stride toward your hunted prey as a free action.
8TH LEVEL
BLIND-FIGHT FEAT 8
RANGER
Prerequisites master in Perception
Your battle instincts make you more aware of concealed and
invisible opponents. You don’t need to succeed at a flat check to
target concealed creatures. You’re not flat-footed to creatures
173
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SAMPLE RANGER that are hidden from you (unless you’re flat-footed to them for
reasons other than the hidden condition), and you need only a
successful DC 5 flat check to target a hidden creature.
While you’re adjacent to an undetected creature of your
level or lower, it is instead only hidden from you.
DEADLY AIM [one-action] FEAT 8
OPEN RANGER
Prerequisites weapon specialization
You aim for your prey’s weak spots, making your shot more
challenging but dealing more damage if you hit. Make a
ranged Strike against your hunted prey at a –2 penalty. You
gain a +4 circumstance bonus to damage on that Strike. This
bonus increases to +6 at 11th level and +8 at 15th level.
HAZARD FINDER FEAT 8
RANGER
You have an intuitive ability to sense hazards. You gain a +1
circumstance bonus to Perception checks to find traps and
hazards, to AC against their attacks, and to saves against
their effects. You can find hazards that would normally
require you to Search even if you aren’t Searching.
POWERFUL SNARES FEAT 8
RANGER
Prerequisites master in Crafting, Snare Specialist
Your snares are particularly difficult for enemies to avoid.
When you set a snare, the saving throw DC for that snare is
equal to its normal DC or your class DC, whichever is higher.
TERRAIN MASTER FEAT 8
RANGER
Prerequisites wild stride, master in Survival, Favored Terrain
You adapt to your surroundings in any natural terrain. You
can spend 1 hour practicing in your current terrain in order
to make it your favored terrain, replacing your current
favored terrain temporarily. If you spend a full day out
of the new favored terrain, your favored terrain reverts
back to your original choice when you took the Favored
Terrain feat.
WARDEN’S BOON [one-action] FEAT 8
RANGER
By pointing out vulnerabilities, you grant the benefits listed
in Hunt Prey and your hunter’s edge benefit to an ally until
the end of their next turn. Depending on whether you call
out or use gestures, this action gains either the auditory or
visual trait.
10TH LEVEL
CAMOUFLAGE FEAT 10
RANGER
Prerequisites master in Stealth
You alter your appearance to blend in to the wilderness. In
natural terrain, you can Sneak even if you’re observed.
ANIMAL RANGER
Sharing a powerful bond, you and your beloved
animal explore the wilds and fight in tandem.
ABILITY SCORES
Prioritize Dexterity, followed by Constitution and
Wisdom. Take Strength if you want to deal more damage.
SKILLS
Acrobatics, Athletics, Medicine, Nature, Stealth, Survival
HUNTER’S EDGE
Outwit
STARTING FEAT
Animal Companion
HIGHER-LEVEL FEATS
Companion’s Cry (4th), Mature Animal Companion
(6th), Incredible Companion (10th), Side by Side (12th),
Specialized Companion (16th), Masterful Companion (18th)
Core Rulebook
174
INCREDIBLE COMPANION FEAT 10
RANGER
Prerequisites Mature Animal Companion
Your animal companion continues to grow and develop. It
becomes a nimble or savage animal companion (your choice),
gaining additional capabilities determined by the type of
companion (page 214).
MASTER MONSTER HUNTER FEAT 10
RANGER
Prerequisites master in Nature, Monster Hunter
You have a nearly encyclopedic knowledge of all creatures of
the world. You can use Nature to Recall Knowledge to identify
any creature. In addition, you gain the benefits of Monster
Hunter (and Monster Warden, if you have it) on a success as
well as a critical success.
PENETRATING SHOT [two-actions] FEAT 10
OPEN RANGER
Requirements You are wielding a ranged weapon.
You shoot clear through an intervening creature to hit your
prey. Choose a target that is giving lesser cover to your hunted
prey. Make a single ranged Strike with the required weapon
against the chosen target and your hunted prey. This attack
ignores any lesser cover the chosen target provides your
hunted prey. Roll damage only once, and apply it to each
creature you hit. A Penetrating Shot counts as two attacks for
your multiple attack penalty.
TWIN RIPOSTE [reaction] FEAT 10
RANGER
Trigger A creature within your reach critically fails a Strike
against you.
Requirements You are benefiting from Twin Parry
A clever parry with one weapon leaves your opponent open to
an attack with the other weapon. Make a melee Strike or use a
Disarm action against the triggering opponent.
WARDEN’S STEP FEAT 10
RANGER
Prerequisites master in Stealth
You can guide your allies to move quietly through the
wilderness. When you Sneak during exploration in natural
terrain, you can designate any number of your allies to gain
the benefits as if they were using that activity during that
exploration. This requires no action on their part.
12TH LEVEL
DISTRACTING SHOT FEAT 12
RANGER
The sheer power of your attacks, or the overwhelming number
of them, leaves an enemy flustered. If you critically hit your
hunted prey with a ranged weapon, or hit it at least twice on
the same turn with a ranged weapon, it’s flat-footed until the
start of your next turn.
DOUBLE PREY FEAT 12
RANGER
You can focus on two foes at once, hunting both of them down.
When you use the Hunt Prey action, you can pick two creatures
as your prey.
LIGHTNING SNARES FEAT 12
RANGER
Prerequisites master in Crafting, Snare Specialist
You can rig a trap with incredible speed. When you create a
snare that normally takes 1 minute to Craft, you can Craft it
using a single Interact action instead.
SECOND STING [one-action] FEAT 12
PRESS RANGER
Requirements You are wielding two melee weapons, each in a
different hand.
You read your prey’s movements and transform them into
openings, so failures with one weapon set up glancing blows
with the other. Make a melee Strike with one of the required
weapons against your hunted prey. The Strike gains the
following failure effect.
Failure You deal the damage the other required weapon would
have dealt on a hit, excluding all damage dice. (This removes
dice from weapon runes, spells, and special abilities, not
just weapon damage dice.)
SIDE BY SIDE FEAT 12
RANGER
Prerequisites an animal companion
You and your animal companion fight in tandem, distracting
your foes and keeping them off balance. Whenever you and
your animal companion are adjacent to the same foe, you are
both flanking that foe with each other, regardless of your
actual positions.
14TH LEVEL
SENSE THE UNSEEN [reaction] FEAT 14
RANGER
Trigger You fail a check to Seek.
When you look for foes, you can catch even the slightest
cues, such as their minute movements or the shifting of
air currents on your skin. Even though you failed at the
triggering check, you automatically sense any undetected
creatures in the area where you’re Seeking, making them
merely hidden to you.
SHARED PREY FEAT 14
RANGER
Prerequisites Double Prey, Warden’s Boon
Hunting as a duo, you and your ally both single out your prey.
When you use Hunt Prey and select only one prey, you can
grant your Hunt Prey benefits and hunter’s edge to an ally
in addition to gaining them yourself. The ally retains these
benefits until you use Hunt Prey again.
175
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SAMPLE RANGER STEALTHY COMPANION FEAT 14
RANGER
Prerequisites Camouflage
You’ve trained your animal companion to blend in to its
surroundings. Your animal companion gains the benefit of the
Camouflage feat. If your companion is a specialized ambusher,
its proficiency rank for Stealth increases to master (or
legendary if it was already master).
TARGETING SHOT [one-action] FEAT 14
CONCENTRATE PRESS RANGER
Prerequisites Hunter’s Aim
You carefully track your prey’s position and defenses, allowing
you to follow up around obstacles that block your shot.
Make a ranged weapon Strike against your hunted prey. You
ignore the target’s concealed condition and all cover.
WARDEN’S GUIDANCE FEAT 14
RANGER
You can convey your prey’s location to your allies, no matter
how well hidden it is. As long as your hunted prey is observed
by you, all your allies who roll failures and critical failures
when Seeking it get a success instead. Your allies need to be
able to see or hear you to gain this benefit. You have to be able
to call out or use gestures for your allies to get this benefit.
16TH LEVEL
GREATER DISTRACTING SHOT FEAT 16
RANGER
Prerequisites Distracting Shot
Even a single missile can throw off your enemy’s balance, and
more powerful attacks leave it flustered for longer. If you hit
your hunted prey with a ranged weapon, it’s flat-footed until
the start of your next turn. If you critically hit your prey or hit
it twice on the same turn with a ranged weapon, it’s flat-footed
until the end of your next turn instead.
IMPROVED TWIN RIPOSTE FEAT 16
RANGER
At the start of each of your turns, you gain an additional
reaction that you can use only to perform a Twin Riposte
against your hunted prey. You can use this extra reaction even
if you are not benefiting from Twin Parry.
LEGENDARY MONSTER HUNTER FEAT 16
RANGER
Prerequisites legendary in Nature, Master Monster Hunter
Your knowledge of monsters is so incredible that it reveals
glaring flaws in your prey. Your bonus from Monster Hunter
(and the bonus from Monster Warden if you have it) increases
from +1 to +2 for you and any allies who benefit.
SPECIALIZED COMPANION FEAT 16
RANGER
Prerequisites Incredible Companion
ARCHER
You keep your distance from your prey, shooting
arrows with incredible precision to hinder or kill
those you hunt.
ABILITY SCORES
Prioritize Dexterity, then Wisdom. Choose Strength if
you want to use a composite bow or thrown weapon, or
Intelligence to be more skilled.
SKILLS
Acrobatics, Athletics, Nature, Stealth, Survival, Thievery
HUNTER’S EDGE
Flurry
STARTING FEAT
Hunted Shot
HIGHER-LEVEL FEATS
Quick Draw (2nd), Far Shot (4th), Skirmish Strike (6th),
Deadly Aim (8th), Penetrating Shot (10th), Distracting
Shot (12th), Impossible Volley (18th)
Core Rulebook
176
Your animal companion has become cunning enough to become
specialized. Your animal companion gains one specialization of
your choice. (See the Animal Companion section on page 214.)
UBIQUITOUS SNARES FEAT 16
RANGER
Prerequisites Snare Specialist
You can prepare a seemingly impossible number of snares in
advance, and you’re ready to spring them on unsuspecting foes.
Double the number of prepared snares from Snare Specialist.
18TH LEVEL
IMPOSSIBLE FLURRY [three-actions] FEAT 18
FLOURISH OPEN RANGER
Requirements You are wielding two melee weapons, each in a
different hand.
You forgo precision to attack at an impossible speed. Make
three melee Strikes with each of the required weapons. All of
these Strikes take the maximum multiple attack penalty, as if
you had already made two or more attacks this turn.
IMPOSSIBLE VOLLEY [three-actions] FEAT 18
RANGER
Requirements You are wielding a ranged weapon with the
volley trait and reload 0.
You fire a volley at all foes in an area. Make one Strike with a
–2 penalty against each enemy within a 10-foot-radius burst
centered at or beyond your weapon’s volley range. Roll the
damage only once for all targets.
Each attack counts toward your multiple attack penalty,
but do not increase your penalty until you have made all
your attacks.
MANIFOLD EDGE FEAT 18
RANGER
Prerequisites hunter’s edge, masterful hunter
You’ve learned every possible edge to use against your foes.
When you use Hunt Prey, you can gain a hunter’s edge benefit
other than the one you selected at 1st level. If you do, you
don’t gain the additional benefit from masterful hunter.
MASTERFUL COMPANION FEAT 18
RANGER
Prerequisites masterful hunter, Animal Companion
Your animal companion shares your incredible hunting skills,
allowing it to take down your shared prey with ease. When
you Hunt Prey, your animal companion gains the masterful
hunter benefit associated with your hunter’s edge, rather than
just your original hunter’s edge benefit.
PERFECT SHOT [three-actions] FEAT 18
FLOURISH RANGER
Requirements You are wielding a loaded ranged weapon with
reload 1 or more, and you have not reloaded your weapon
since your last turn.
After watching the motions of combat with incredible intensity
and precision, you fire at your prey at the perfect moment to
deliver maximum pain. Make a ranged Strike with the required
weapon against your hunted prey. If you hit, the Strike deals
maximum damage. After the Strike, your turn ends.
SHADOW HUNTER FEAT 18
RANGER
Prerequisites Camouflage
You blend in to your surroundings so well that others have
trouble telling you apart from the terrain. While in natural
terrain, you’re always concealed from all foes if you choose to
be, except for your hunted prey.
20TH LEVEL
LEGENDARY SHOT FEAT 20
RANGER
Prerequisites masterful hunter, legendary in Perception, Far Shot
You focus on your hunted prey, perceiving angles, air
resistance, and every variable that would affect your ranged
attack. If you have master proficiency with your ranged
weapon, you can ignore the penalty for attacking up to five
range increments away when attacking your hunted prey.
TO THE ENDS OF THE EARTH FEAT 20
RANGER
Prerequisites legendary in Survival
Your ability to track your prey has surpassed explanation,
allowing you to trace your prey’s movements and predict its
location with ease. When you use Hunt Prey on a creature
within 100 feet, you can follow that creature’s movements,
allowing you to know the creature’s exact location no matter
how far away it becomes, as long as it remains your prey. You
must be legendary in Nature to track your prey’s location across
teleportation or planar travel. This feat gains the detection,
divination, and primal traits if you’re legendary in Nature.
TRIPLE THREAT FEAT 20
RANGER
Prerequisites Shared Prey
You can divide your attention three ways when hunting. When
you use Hunt Prey, you can designate three creatures as prey,
designate two creatures as prey and share the effect with one
ally (as Shared Prey), or designate one creature as prey and
share the effect with two allies.
ULTIMATE SKIRMISHER FEAT 20
RANGER
Prerequisites wild stride
You are so skilled at navigating the wild, your movement is
completely unaffected by terrain. You ignore the effects of
all difficult terrain, greater difficult terrain, and hazardous
terrain, and you don’t trigger traps and hazards that are
triggered by moving into an area (such as trip wires and
pressure plates), unless you want to.
177
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Core Rulebook
178
Rogue
During combat encounters...
You move about stealthily so you can catch foes unawares. You’re a precision
instrument, more useful against a tough boss or distant spellcaster than against
rank-and-file soldiers.
During social encounters...
Your skills give you multiple tools to influence your opposition. Pulling cons and
ferreting out information are second nature to you.
While exploring...
You sneak to get the drop on foes and scout for danger or traps. You’re a great asset,
since you can disable traps, solve puzzles, and anticipate dangers.
In downtime...
You might pick pockets or trade in illegal goods. You can also become part of a
thieves’ guild, or even found one of your own.
You Might...
• Hone your skills through intense practice, both on your own and out in the world.
• Know where to attain illicit goods.
• Skirt or break the law because you think it’s meaningless or have your own code.
Others Probably...
• Find you charming or fascinating, even if they think they know better than to
trust you.
• Come to you when they need someone who is willing to take risks or use
questionable methods.
• Suspect you’re motivated primarily by greed.
You are skilled and opportunistic. Using your sharp wits and quick reactions,
you take advantage of your opponents’ missteps and strike where it hurts
most. You play a dangerous game, seeking thrills and testing your skills, and
likely don’t care much for any laws that happen to get in your way. While the path of
every rogue is unique and riddled with danger, the one thing you all share in common is
the breadth and depth of your skills.
INITIAL PROFICIENCIES
At 1st level, you gain the
listed proficiency ranks in
the following statistics. You
are untrained in anything
not listed unless you gain a
better proficiency rank in some
other way.
PERCEPTION
Expert in Perception
SAVING THROWS
Trained in Fortitude
Expert in Reflex
Expert in Will
SKILLS
Trained in Stealth
Trained in one or more skills
determined by your rogue's
racket.
Trained in a number of
additional skills equal to
7 plus your Intelligence
modifier
ATTACKS
Trained in simple weapons
Trained in the rapier, sap,
shortbow, and shortsword
Trained in unarmed attacks
DEFENSES
Trained in light armor
Trained in unarmored defense
CLASS DC
Trained in rogue class DC
KEY ABILITY
DEXTERITY OR OTHER
At 1st level, your class gives you
an ability boost to Dexterity or
an option from rogue’s racket.
HIT POINTS
8 plus your Constitution modifier
You increase your maximum number of
HP by this number at 1st level and every
level thereafter.
CLASSES 3
179
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Class Features
You gain these abilities as a rogue. Abilities gained at
higher levels list the level at which you gain them next to
the features’ names.
Ancestry and Background
In addition to what you get from your class at 1st level,
you have the benefits of your selected ancestry and
background, as described in Chapter 2.
Initial Proficiencies
At 1st level, you gain a number of proficiencies that
represent your basic training. These proficiencies are
noted at the start of this class.
Rogue’s Racket
As you started on the path of the rogue, you began to
develop your own style to pursue your illicit activities.
Your racket shapes your rogue techniques and the way
you approach a job, while building your reputation in the
criminal underworld for a certain type of work. A client
with deep pockets might even hire a team of rogues for a
particular heist, each specializing in a different racket, in
order to cover all the bases. Choose a rogue’s racket. The
rackets presented in this book are as follows.
Ruffian
You prefer to strong-arm or intimidate others rather than
rely on finesse or fancy tricks. You might be an enforcer for
organized crime, a highway bandit, or a noble who bullies
others with threats of your family’s power. Or, you might
use your skills on the up and up, in a private security detail
or as a guard in a city with the right temperament.
You use whatever tools you have at hand to get the job
done. You can deal sneak attack damage with any simple
weapon, in addition to the weapons listed in the sneak
attack class feature. When you critically succeed at an
attack roll using a simple weapon and the target has the
flat-footed condition (unable to focus on defending itself),
you also apply the critical specialization effect for the
weapon you’re wielding (page 283). You don’t gain these
benefits if the weapon has a damage die larger than d8
(after applying any abilities that alter its damage die size).
You’re trained in Intimidation and medium armor. You
can choose Strength as your key ability score. When you
gain light armor expertise, you also gain expert proficiency
in medium armor, and when you gain light armor mastery,
you also gain master proficiency in medium armor.
Scoundrel
You use fast-talking, flattery, and a silver tongue to avoid
danger and escape tricky situations. You might be a grifter
or con artist, traveling from place to place with a new story
or scheme. Your racket is also ideal for certain reputable
professions, like barrister, diplomat, or politician.
When you successfully Feint (page 246), the target is
flat-footed against melee attacks you attempt against it
until the end of your next turn. On a critical success, the
target is flat-footed against all melee attacks until the end
of your next turn, not just yours.
You’re trained in Deception and Diplomacy. You can
choose Charisma as your key ability score.
Thief
Nothing beats the thrill of taking something that belongs
to someone else, especially if you can do so completely
unnoticed. You might be a pickpocket working the streets,
a cat burglar sneaking through windows and escaping via
rooftops, or a safecracker breaking into carefully guarded
vaults. You might even work as a consultant, testing
clients’ defenses by trying to steal something precious.
When a fight breaks out, you prefer swift, lightweight
weapons, and you strike where it hurts. When you attack
with a finesse melee weapon, you can add your Dexterity
modifier to damage rolls instead of your Strength modifier.
You are trained in Thievery.
TABLE 3–15: ROGUE ADVANCEMENT
Your
Level Class Features
1 Ancestry and background, initial proficiencies,
rogue’s racket, sneak attack 1d6, surprise attack,
rogue feat, skill feat
2 Rogue feat, skill feat, skill increase
3 Deny advantage, general feat, skill feat, skill increase
4 Rogue feat, skill feat, skill increase
5 Ability boosts, ancestry feat, skill feat, skill
increase, sneak attack 2d6, weapon tricks
6 Rogue feat, skill feat, skill increase
7 Evasion, general feat, skill feat, skill increase,
vigilant senses, weapon specialization
8 Rogue feat, skill feat, skill increase
9 Ancestry feat, debilitating strike, great fortitude,
skill feat, skill increase
10 Ability boosts, rogue feat, skill feat, skill increase
11 General feat, rogue expertise, skill feat, skill
increase, sneak attack 3d6
12 Rogue feat, skill feat, skill increase
13 Ancestry feat, improved evasion, incredible senses,
light armor expertise, master tricks, skill feat,
skill increase
14 Rogue feat, skill feat, skill increase
15 Ability boosts, double debilitation, general feat,
greater weapon specialization, skill feat, skill increase
16 Rogue feat, skill feat, skill increase
17 Ancestry feat, skill feat, skill increase, slippery
mind, sneak attack 4d6
18 Rogue feat, skill feat, skill increase
19 General feat, light armor mastery, master strike,
skill feat, skill increase
20 Ability boosts, rogue feat, skill feat, skill increase
Core Rulebook
180
Sneak Attack
When your enemy can’t properly defend itself, you take
advantage to deal extra damage. If you Strike a creature
that has the flat-footed condition (page 620) with an
agile or finesse melee weapon, an agile or finesse unarmed
attack, or a ranged weapon attack, you deal an extra 1d6
precision damage. For a ranged attack with a thrown
melee weapon, that weapon must also be agile or finesse.
As your rogue level increases, so does the number of
damage dice for your sneak attack. Increase the number
of dice by one at 5th, 11th, and 17th levels.
Surprise Attack
You spring into combat faster than foes can react. On
the first round of combat, if you roll Deception or Stealth
for initiative, creatures that haven’t acted are flat-footed
to you.
Rogue Feats
At 1st level and every even-numbered level, you gain a
rogue class feat.
Skill Feats
You gain skill feats more often than others. At 1st level
and every level thereafter, you gain a skill feat. Skill feats
can be found in Chapter 5 and have the skill trait.
Skill Increases 2nd
You gain more skill increases than members of other
classes. At 2nd level and every level thereafter, you gain a
skill increase. You can use this increase to either become
trained in one skill you’re untrained in, or to become an
expert in one skill in which you’re already trained.
At 7th level, you can use skill increases to become a
master in a skill in which you’re already an expert, and
at 15th level, you can use them to become legendary in a
skill in which you’re already a master.
Deny Advantage 3rd
As someone who takes advantage of others’ defenses,
you are careful not to leave such openings yourself.
You aren’t flat-footed to hidden, undetected, or flanking
creatures of your level or lower, or creatures of your level
or lower using surprise attack. However, they can still
help their allies flank.
General Feats 3rd
At 3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter, you gain a
general feat. General feats are listed in Chapter 5.
Ability Boosts 5th
At 5th level and every 5 levels thereafter, you boost four
different ability scores. You can use these ability boosts to
increase your ability scores above 18. Boosting an ability
score increases it by 1 if it’s already 18 or above, or by 2
if it starts out below 18.
KEY TERMS
You’ll see the following key terms in many rogue
class features.
Debilitation: Debilitations apply conditions and other
negative effects to a creature. When the creature is
affected by a new debilitation, any previous one it was
affected by ends.
Flourish: Actions with this trait are special techniques
that require too much exertion for you to perform
frequently. You can use only 1 action with the flourish
trait per turn.
181
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Ancestry Feats 5th
In addition to the initial ancestry feat you started with,
you gain an ancestry feat at 5th level and every 4 levels
thereafter. The list of ancestry feats available to you can
be found in your ancestry’s entry in Chapter 2.
Weapon Tricks 5th
You have become thoroughly familiar with the tools of
your trade. You gain expert proficiency in simple weapons,
as well as the rapier, sap, shortbow, and shortsword.
When you critically succeed at an attack roll against a
flat-footed creature while using an agile or finesse simple
weapon or any of the listed weapons, you apply the critical
specialization effect for the weapon you’re wielding.
Evasion 7th
You’ve learned to move quickly to avoid explosions,
dragons’ breath, and worse. Your proficiency rank for
Reflex saves increases to master. When you roll a success
on a Reflex save, you get a critical success instead.
Vigilant Senses 7th
Through your adventures, you’ve developed keen
awareness and attention to detail. Your proficiency rank
for Perception increases to master.
Weapon Specialization 7th
You’ve learned how to inflict greater injuries with the
weapons you know best. You deal 2 additional damage
with weapons and unarmed attacks in which you are an
expert. This damage increases to 3 damage if you’re a
master, and 4 damage if you’re legendary.
Debilitating Strike 9th
When taking advantage of an opening, you both hinder and
harm your foe. You gain the Debilitating Strike free action.
DEBILITATING STRIKE [free-action]
ROGUE
Trigger Your Strike hits a flat-footed creature and deals damage.
You apply one of the following debilitations, which lasts until
the end of your next turn.
Debilitation The target takes a –10-foot status penalty to
its Speeds.
Debilitation The target becomes enfeebled 1.
Great Fortitude 9th
Your physique is incredibly hardy. Your proficiency rank
for Fortitude saves increases to expert.
Rogue Expertise 11th
Your techniques are now harder to resist. Your proficiency
rank for your rogue class DC increases to expert.
Improved Evasion 13th
You elude danger to a degree that few can match.
Your  proficiency rank for Reflex saves increases to
legendary. When you roll a critical failure on a Reflex
save, you get a failure instead. When you fail a Reflex
save against a damaging effect, you take half damage.
Incredible Senses 13th
You notice things almost impossible for an ordinary
person to detect. Your proficiency rank for Perception
increases to legendary.
Light Armor Expertise 13th
You’ve learned how to dodge while wearing light or
no armor. Your proficiency ranks for light armor and
unarmored defense increase to expert.
Master Tricks 13th
You’ve mastered a rogue’s fighting moves. Your proficiency
ranks increase to master for all simple weapons plus the
rapier, sap, shortbow, and shortsword.
Double Debilitation 15th
Your opportunistic attacks are particularly detrimental.
When you use Debilitating Strike, you can apply two
debilitations simultaneously; removing one removes both.
Greater Weapon Specialization 15th
Your damage from weapon specialization increases to 4
with weapons and unarmed attacks in which you’re an
expert, 6 if you’re a master, and 8 if you’re legendary.
Slippery Mind 17th
You play mental games and employ cognitive tricks to
throw off mind-altering effects. Your proficiency rank for
Will saves increases to master. When you roll a success at
a Will save, you get a critical success instead.
Light Armor Mastery 19th
Your skill with light armor improves, increasing your
ability to dodge blows. Your proficiency ranks for light
armor and unarmored defense increase to master.
Master Strike 19th
You can incapacitate an unwary foe with a single strike.
Your proficiency rank for your rogue class DC increases
to master. You gain the Master Strike free action.
MASTER STRIKE[free-action]
INCAPACITATION ROGUE
Trigger Your Strike hits a flat-footed creature and deals damage.
The target attempts a Fortitude save at your class DC. It then
becomes temporarily immune to your Master Strike for 1 day.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target is enfeebled 2 until the end of your next turn.
Failure The target is paralyzed for 4 rounds.
Critical Failure The target is paralyzed for 4 rounds, knocked
unconscious for 2 hours, or killed (your choice).
Core Rulebook
182
Rogue Feats
At every level that you gain a rogue feat, you can select one of the following feats.
You must satisfy any prerequisites before selecting the feat.
1ST LEVEL
NIMBLE DODGE [one-action[reaction] FEAT 1
ROGUE
Trigger A creature targets you with an attack and you can see the attacker.
Requirements You are not encumbered.
You deftly dodge out of the way, gaining a +2 circumstance bonus to AC against the
triggering attack.
TRAP FINDER FEAT 1
ROGUE
You have an intuitive sense that alerts you to the dangers and presence of traps. You gain
a +1 circumstance bonus to Perception checks to find traps, to AC against attacks made by
traps, and to saves against traps. Even if you aren’t Searching, you get a check to find traps
that normally require you to be Searching. You still need to meet any other requirements
to find the trap.
You can disable traps that require a proficiency rank of master in Thievery. If you have
master proficiency in Thievery, you can disable traps that require a proficiency rank of
legendary instead, and your circumstance bonuses against traps increase to +2.
TWIN FEINT [two-actions]] FEAT 1
ROGUE
Requirements You are wielding two melee weapons, each in a different hand.
You make a dazzling series of attacks with both weapons, using the first attack to
throw your foe off guard against a second attack at a different angle. Make one Strike
with each of your two melee weapons, both against the same target. The target is
automatically flat-footed against the second attack. Apply your multiple attack penalty
to the Strikes normally.
YOU’RE NEXT [reaction] FEAT 1
EMOTION FEAR MENTAL ROGUE
Prerequisites trained in Intimidation
Trigger You reduce an enemy to 0 hit points.
After downing a foe, you menacingly remind another foe that you’re coming after them
next. Attempt an Intimidation check with a +2 circumstance bonus to Demoralize a single
creature that you can see and that can see you. If you have legendary proficiency in
Intimidation, you can use this as a free action with the same trigger.
2ND LEVEL
BRUTAL BEATING FEAT 2
ROGUE
Prerequisites ruffian racket
The brutality of your critical hits shakes your foes’ confidence. Whenever your Strike is a
critical hit and deals damage, the target is frightened 1.
DISTRACTING FEINT FEAT 2
ROGUE
Prerequisites scoundrel racket
Your Feints are far more distracting than normal, drawing your foes’ attention and allowing
you and your allies to take greater advantage. While a creature is flat-footed by your Feint,
it also takes a –2 circumstance penalty to Perception checks and Reflex saves.
ROGUE FEATS
Use this table to look up rogue
feats by name.
Feat Level
Battle Assessment 4
Blank Slate 16
Blind-Fight 8
Brutal Beating 2
Cloud Step 16
Cognitive Loophole 16
Critical Debilitation 12
Defensive Roll 14
Delay Trap 8
Dispelling Slice 16
Distracting Feint 2
Dread Striker 4
Fantastic Leap 12
Felling Shot 12
Gang Up 6
Hidden Paragon 20
Implausible Infiltration 18
Impossible Striker 20
Improved Poison Weapon 8
Instant Opening 14
Leave an Opening 14
Light Step 6
Magical Trickster 4
Minor Magic 2
Mobility 2
Nimble Dodge 1
Nimble Roll 8
Opportune Backstab 8
Perfect Distraction 16
Poison Weapon 4
Powerful Sneak 18
Precise Debilitations 10
Quick Draw 2
Reactive Distraction 20
Reactive Interference 12
Reactive Pursuit 4
Sabotage 4
Scout’s Warning 4
Sense the Unseen 14
Sidestep 8
Skirmish Strike 6
Sly Striker 8
Sneak Savant 10
Spring from the Shadows 12
Tactical Debilitations 10
Trap Finder 1
Trickster’s Ace 18
Twin Feint 1
Twist the Knife 6
Unbalancing Blow 2
Vicious Debilitations 10
You’re Next 1
183
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SAMPLE ROGUE MINOR MAGIC FEAT 2
ROGUE
You’ve dabbled in a variety of tricks, gaining minor magical
abilities from a particular tradition. Choose arcane, divine,
occult, or primal magic, and gain two cantrips from the
common cantrips available to that tradition.
MOBILITY FEAT 2
ROGUE
You move in a way that denies your enemies the opportunity
to retaliate. When you take a Stride action to move half your
Speed or less, that movement does not trigger reactions. You
can use Mobility when Climbing, Flying, or Swimming instead
of Striding if you have the corresponding movement type.
QUICK DRAW [one-action] FEAT 2
ROGUE
You draw your weapon and attack with the same motion. You
Interact to draw a weapon, then Strike with that weapon.
UNBALANCING BLOW FEAT 2
ROGUE
Prerequisites thief racket
Interweaving your most powerful attacks in a graceful flow,
you temporarily unbalance your foes. Whenever your Strike is
a critical hit and deals damage, the target is flat-footed against
your attacks until the end of your next turn.
4TH LEVEL
BATTLE ASSESSMENT [one-action] FEAT 4
ROGUE SECRET
With careful observation during battle, you identify an
enemy’s strengths and weaknesses. The GM rolls a secret
Perception check for you against the Deception or Stealth DC
(whichever is higher) of an enemy of your choice who is not
concealed from you, hidden from you, or undetected by you,
and who is engaged in combat. The GM might apply a penalty
for the distance between you and the enemy. The enemy is
then temporarily immune to your Battle Assessment for 1 day.
Critical Success The GM chooses two of the following pieces
of information about the enemy to tell you: which of the
enemy’s weaknesses is highest, which of the enemy’s
saving throws has the lowest modifier, one immunity the
enemy has, or which of the enemy’s resistances is highest.
If the event of a tie, the GM should pick one at random.
Success The GM chooses one piece of information from the
above list to tell you about the enemy.
Critical Failure The GM gives you false information (the GM
makes up the information).
DREAD STRIKER FEAT 4
ROGUE
You capitalize on your enemies’ fear to slip past their defenses.
Any creature that has the frightened condition is also
flat-footed against your attacks.
SCOUNDREL
Your attacks are made deadly through distraction.
ABILITY SCORES
Prioritize Dexterity, plus Charisma to improve your feints.
SKILLS
Acrobatics, Athletics, Crafting, Deception, Diplomacy,
Intimidation, Occultism, Society, Stealth, Thievery
ROGUE’S RACKET
Scoundrel
STARTING FEAT
Trap Finder
HIGHER-LEVEL FEATS
Distracting Feint (2nd), Twist the Knife (6th), Tactical
Debilitations (10th), Perfect Distraction (16th)
Core Rulebook
184
REACTIVE PURSUIT [reaction] FEAT 4
ROGUE
Trigger An adjacent foe moves away from you, and you can reach
at least one space adjacent to the foe with a Stride action.
You keep pace with a retreating foe. You Stride, but you must
end your movement adjacent to the triggering enemy. Your
move does not trigger reactions from the triggering enemy. You
can use Reactive Pursuit to Burrow, Climb, Fly, or Swim instead
of Stride if you have the corresponding movement type.
SABOTAGE [one-action] FEAT 4
INCAPACITATION ROGUE
Requirements You have a free hand.
You subtly damage others’ equipment. Choose one item that a
creature within your reach wields or carries. The item must have
moving parts that you could possibly sabotage (a shortbow
could be sabotaged, but a longsword could not). Attempt a
Thievery check against the Reflex DC of the creature. Damage
dealt by Sabotage can’t take the item below its Break Threshold.
Critical Success You deal damage equal to four times your
Thievery proficiency bonus.
Success You deal damage equal to double your Thievery
proficiency bonus.
Critical Failure Temporarily immune to your Sabotage for 1 day.
MAGICAL TRICKSTER FEAT 4
ROGUE
Whether you’re using magic items, wielding innate magic,
or dabbling in spellcasting, you can sneak spells past your
foes’ defenses as easily as any blade. When you succeed at
a spell attack roll against a flat-footed foe’s AC and the spell
deals damage, you can add your sneak attack damage to the
damage roll. If your single spell leads to multiple separate
damage rolls, apply your sneak attack damage only once
per target.
POISON WEAPON [one-action] FEAT 4
MANIPULATE ROGUE
Requirements You are wielding a piercing or slashing weapon
and have a free hand.
You apply a poison to the required weapon. If your next attack
with that weapon before the end of your next turn hits and
deals damage, it applies the effects of the poison, provided that
poison can be delivered by contact or injury. If you critically fail
the attack roll, the poison is wasted as normal.
Special During your daily preparations, you can prepare a
number of simple injury poisons equal to your rogue level. These
poisons deal 1d4 poison damage. Only you can apply these
poisons properly, and they expire the next time you prepare.
185
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SAMPLE ROGUE SCOUT’S WARNING [free-action] FEAT 4
ROGUE
Trigger You are about to roll a Perception or Survival check
for initiative.
You visually or audibly warn your allies of danger, granting
them each a +1 circumstance bonus to their initiative rolls.
Depending on whether you use gestures or call out, this action
gains either the visual or auditory trait, respectively.
6TH LEVEL
GANG UP FEAT 6
ROGUE
You and your allies harry an opponent in concert. Any enemy is
flat-footed against your melee attacks due to flanking as long as
the enemy is within both your reach and your ally’s. Your allies
must still flank an enemy for it to be flat-footed to them.
LIGHT STEP FEAT 6
ROGUE
You aren’t bothered by tricky footing. When you Stride or Step,
you can ignore difficult terrain.
SKIRMISH STRIKE [one-action] FEAT 6
FLOURISH ROGUE
Your feet and weapon move in tandem. Either Step and then
Strike, or Strike and then Step.
TWIST THE KNIFE [one-action] FEAT 6
ROGUE
Requirements Your last action was a melee Strike that dealt
sneak attack damage to a flat-footed target.
After stabbing your opponent in a weak spot, you tear the
wound open. You deal persistent bleed damage to the target
equal to your number of sneak attack damage dice.
8TH LEVEL
BLIND-FIGHT FEAT 8
ROGUE
Prerequisites master in Perception
Your battle instincts make you more aware of concealed and
invisible opponents. You don’t need to succeed at a flat check to
target concealed creatures. You’re not flat-footed to creatures
that are hidden from you (unless you’re flat-footed to them for
reasons other than the hidden condition), and you need only a
successful DC 5 flat check to target a hidden creature.
While you’re adjacent to an undetected creature of your
level or lower, it is instead only hidden from you.
DELAY TRAP [reaction] FEAT 8
ROGUE
Trigger A trap within your reach is triggered.
You can jam the workings of a trap to delay its effects. Attempt
a Thievery check to Disable a Device on the trap; the DC to do
so is increased by 5, and the effects are as follows.
THIEF
Furtive and swift, you pick locks, find secret doors
and traps, and collect all the best loot.
ABILITY SCORES
Prioritize Dexterity. Constitution improves your health and
Wisdom helps you notice traps.
SKILLS
Acrobatics, Arcana, Athletics, Crafting, Deception,
Diplomacy, Society, Stealth, Thievery
ROGUE’S RACKET
Thief
STARTING FEAT
Nimble Dodge
HIGHER-LEVEL FEATS
Quick Draw (2nd), Skirmish Strike (6th), Sneak Savant (10th),
Spring from the Shadows (12th), Implausible Infiltration (18th)
Core Rulebook
186
Critical Success You prevent the trap from being triggered, or
you delay the activation until the start or end of your next
turn (your choice).
Success You prevent the trap from being triggered, or
you delay the activation until the end of your next turn
(whichever is worse for you; GM’s choice).
Failure No effect.
Critical Failure You’re flat-footed until the start of your next turn.
IMPROVED POISON WEAPON FEAT 8
ROGUE
Prerequisites Poison Weapon
You deliver poisons in ways that maximize their harmful
effects. When you apply a simple poison with Poison Weapon,
the poison deals 2d4 poison damage instead of 1d4 poison
damage. You don’t waste a poison you apply with Poison
Weapon on a critically failed attack roll.
NIMBLE ROLL FEAT 8
ROGUE
Prerequisites Nimble Dodge
You throw yourself into a roll to escape imminent danger.
You can use Nimble Dodge before attempting a Reflex save
in addition to its original trigger. If you do, the circumstance
bonus applies to your Reflex save against the triggering effect.
When you use Nimble Dodge and the triggering attack fails
or critically fails, or when you succeed or critically succeed
at the saving throw, you can also Stride up to 10 feet as part
of the reaction. If you do, the reaction gains the move trait.
You can use Nimble Roll while Flying or Swimming instead of
Striding if you have the corresponding movement type.
OPPORTUNE BACKSTAB [reaction] FEAT 8
ROGUE
Trigger A creature within your melee reach is hit by a melee
attack from one of your allies.
When your enemy is hit by your ally, you capitalize upon the
distraction. Make a Strike against the triggering creature.
SIDESTEP [reaction] FEAT 8
ROGUE
Trigger The attack roll for a Strike targeting you fails or
critically fails.
You deftly step out of the way of an attack, letting the blow
continue to the creature next to you. You redirect the attack to
a creature of your choice that is adjacent to you and within the
reach of the triggering attack. The attacker rerolls the Strike’s
attack roll against the new target.
SLY STRIKER FEAT 8
ROGUE
Prerequisites sneak attack
Your attacks deal more damage, even against creatures that
aren’t flat-footed. When you succeed or critically succeed at a
Strike against a creature that isn’t flat-footed, you also deal 1d6
precision damage. This applies only if you’re using a weapon or
unarmed attack you could deal sneak attack damage with. At
14th level, if you would normally deal 3d6 or more sneak attack
damage to flat-footed creatures, you deal 2d6 precision damage
to creatures that aren’t flat-footed.
10TH LEVEL
PRECISE DEBILITATIONS FEAT 10
ROGUE
Prerequisites thief racket, Debilitating Strike
You carefully aim and gracefully deliver your debilitations.
Add the following debilitations to the list you can choose from
when you use Debilitating Strike.
• Debilitation The target takes an additional 2d6
precision damage from your attacks.
• Debilitation The target becomes flat-footed.
SNEAK SAVANT FEAT 10
ROGUE
Prerequisite master in Stealth
It is almost impossible to spot you without taking effort to
look. When you roll a failure on a Sneak action, you get a
success instead. You can still critically fail.
TACTICAL DEBILITATIONS FEAT 10
ROGUE
Prerequisites scoundrel racket, Debilitating Strike
You learn new debilitations that grant you tactical advantages
against your foes. Add the following debilitations to the list
you can choose from when you use Debilitating Strike.
• Debilitation The target can’t use reactions.
• Debilitation The target can’t flank or contribute to allies’
flanking.
VICIOUS DEBILITATIONS FEAT 10
ROGUE
Prerequisites ruffian racket, Debilitating Strike
The debilitations you dish out seriously impair your foes. Add
the following debilitations to the list you can choose from
when you use Debilitating Strike.
• Debilitation The target gains weakness 5 to your
choice of bludgeoning, piercing, or slashing damage.
• Debilitation The target becomes clumsy 1.
12TH LEVEL
CRITICAL DEBILITATION FEAT 12
INCAPACITATION ROGUE
Prerequisites Debilitating Strike
Your debilitations are especially effective on your most
powerful attacks. Whenever you critically succeed at an
attack roll against an enemy and use Debilitating Strike, add
the following debilitation to the list you can choose from.
• Debilitation The target attempts a Fortitude save
against your class DC with the following effects.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
187
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Dropping into a roll to disperse the force of the blow, you can
partially evade a lethal attack and stay conscious. You take
half damage from the triggering attack.
INSTANT OPENING [one-action] FEAT 14
CONCENTRATE ROGUE
You distract your opponent with a few choice words or a rude
gesture. Choose a target within 30 feet. It’s flat-footed against
your attacks until the end of your next turn. Depending on the
way you describe your distraction, this action gains either the
auditory or visual trait.
LEAVE AN OPENING FEAT 14
ROGUE
When you hit hard enough, you leave an opening so your
ally can jump in on the action. Whenever you critically hit a
flat-footed opponent with a melee attack and deal damage, the
target triggers an Attack of Opportunity reaction from one ally
of your choice who has that reaction, as if the enemy had used
a manipulate action.
SENSE THE UNSEEN [reaction] FEAT 14
ROGUE
Trigger You fail a check to Seek.
When you look for foes, you catch the slightest of cues. Even
though you failed at the triggering check, you automatically
sense any undetected creatures in the area where you’re
Seeking, making them merely hidden to you.
16TH LEVEL
BLANK SLATE FEAT 16
ROGUE
Prerequisites legendary in Deception
Your deceptions confound even the most powerful mortal
divinations. Detection, revelation, and scrying effects pass
right over you, your possessions, and your auras, detecting
nothing unless the detecting effect has a counteract level of
20 or higher. For example, detect magic would still detect other
magic in the area but not any magic on you, true seeing wouldn’t
reveal you, locate or scrying wouldn’t find you, and so on.
CLOUD STEP FEAT 16
ROGUE
Prerequisites legendary in Acrobatics
Using fantastic acrobatic skill, you can walk for brief stretches
across insubstantial surfaces. When you Stride, you can move
across water, air, and solid surfaces that can hold only limited
weight as if they were normal ground. If you Stride over a trap
with a weight-sensitive pressure plate, you don’t trigger it. At
the end of your turn, you sink, fall, break fragile surfaces, or
trigger traps as normal for your current location.
COGNITIVE LOOPHOLE [reaction] FEAT 16
ROGUE
Trigger Your turn ends.
Success The target is slowed 1 until the end of your next turn.
Failure The target is slowed 2 until the end of your next turn.
Critical Failure The target is paralyzed until the end of your
next turn.
FANTASTIC LEAP [two-actions] FEAT 12
ROGUE
You launch yourself through the air at a foe. Attempt a High
Jump or Long Jump. If you attempt a High Jump, determine the
distance you can travel using the scale of a Long Jump. At the
end of your jump, you can make a melee Strike.
After your Strike, you fall to the ground if you’re in the air.
If the distance of your fall is no more than the height of your
jump, you take no damage and land upright.
FELLING SHOT [two-actions] FEAT 12
ROGUE
Your ranged attacks can shoot an unprepared foe right out
of the air. Make a Strike with a ranged weapon or a thrown
weapon against a flat-footed creature. If the Strike is a success
and deals damage, the target must attempt a Reflex save
against your class DC with the following effects.
Success The target is unaffected.
Failure The target falls up to 120 feet. If it hits the ground, it
takes no damage from the fall.
Critical Failure As failure, and the target can’t fly, jump, levitate,
or otherwise leave the ground until the end of your next turn.
REACTIVE INTERFERENCE [reaction] FEAT 12
ROGUE
Trigger An adjacent enemy begins to use a reaction.
Grabbing a sleeve, swiping with your weapon, or creating
another obstruction, you reflexively foil an enemy’s
response. If the triggering creature’s level is equal to or
lower than yours, you disrupt the triggering reaction. If the
triggering creature’s level is higher than yours, you must
make an attack roll against its AC. On a success, you disrupt
the reaction.
SPRING FROM THE SHADOWS [one-action] FEAT 12
FLOURISH ROGUE
Leaping out from hiding, you assail your target when they least
expect it. You Stride up to your Speed, but you must end your
movement next to an enemy you’re hidden from or undetected
by. You then Strike that enemy; you remain hidden from or
undetected by that creature until after you Strike. You can use
Spring from the Shadows while Burrowing, Climbing, Flying, or
Swimming instead of Striding if you have the corresponding
movement type.
14TH LEVEL
DEFENSIVE ROLL [reaction[free-action] FEAT 14
ROGUE
Frequency once per 10 minutes
Trigger A physical attack would reduce you to 0 Hit Points.
Core Rulebook
188
Requirements You are currently affected by a mental effect that
you gained by failing, but not critically failing, a saving throw.
You can find a loophole in a mental effect to temporarily
overcome it. Until the end of your next turn, you ignore a single
mental effect that meets the requirement. You can suppress a
particular effect using Cognitive Loophole only once.
Special You can use this reaction even if the mental effect is
preventing you from using reactions.
DISPELLING SLICE [two-actions] FEAT 16
ROGUE
Your sneak attack slices through the threads binding magic
to a target. Make a Strike against a flat-footed creature
(your choice). If your Strike deals sneak attack damage, you
attempt to counteract a single spell active on the target.
Your counteract level is equal to your rogue level, and your
counteract check modifier is equal to your class DC – 10.
PERFECT DISTRACTION [one-action] FEAT 16
ROGUE
Prerequisites legendary in Deception
You use clever tactics to mislead your foes as you sneak away.
You Sneak while leaving a decoy behind. The decoy acts as
the spell mislead, though you aren’t invisible, just undetected.
You can continue to concentrate to move your decoy, as with
the spell, whether or not you remain hidden throughout the
duration. Once you use Perfect Distraction, you need to spend
10 minutes to set up another decoy before you can use it again.
18TH LEVEL
IMPLAUSIBLE INFILTRATION [two-actions] FEAT 18
MAGICAL MOVE ROGUE
Prerequisites legendary in Acrobatics, Quick Squeeze
Requirements You are adjacent to a floor or vertical wall.
You find tiny holes or imperfections that no one else could see
and try to somehow fit yourself through them, possibly moving
directly through the wall or floor from one side to the other. Your
movement attempt fails if the wall or floor is made of something
other than wood, plaster, or stone; is thicker than 10 feet; or
contains even a thin layer of metal. If you have a climb Speed,
you can use this ability to attempt to move through a ceiling.
POWERFUL SNEAK FEAT 18
ROGUE
You have learned to exploit your enemies’ lowered defenses.
When you succeed or critically succeed at a Strike using your
Strength modifier on the attack roll and you would deal sneak
attack damage, you can change the additional damage from
sneak attack into ordinary damage of the same type as your
Strike, rather than precision damage.
TRICKSTER’S ACE [reaction] FEAT 18
CONCENTRATE ROGUE
Trigger You specify the trigger when you make your daily
preparations (see Requirements below).
Requirements When you make your daily preparations, you
must specify a trigger for this reaction using the same
restrictions as the triggers for the Ready action. You also
choose a single spell from the arcane, divine, occult, or
primal list of 4th level or lower. The spell can’t have a cost,
nor can its casting time be more than 10 minutes. The spell
must be able to target a single creature, and you must be a
valid target for it.
Whether from jury-rigged magic items, stolen magical
essence, or other means, you have a contingency in your
back pocket for desperate situations. When the trigger
occurs, you cause the spell to come into effect. The spell
targets only you, no matter how many creatures it would
affect normally. If you define particularly complicated
conditions, as determined by the GM, the trigger might fail.
Once the contingency is triggered, the spell is expended until
your next daily preparations.
20TH LEVEL
HIDDEN PARAGON [reaction] FEAT 20
ROGUE
Prerequisites legendary in Stealth
Frequency once per hour
Trigger You successfully use Stealth to Hide and become
hidden from all of your current foes, or use Stealth to Sneak
and become undetected to all your current foes.
When you put your mind to slipping out of sight, you disappear
completely. You become invisible for 1 minute, even if you use
a hostile action. Not even glitterdust, see invisibility, or similar
effects can reveal you, though creatures can still use the Seek
action to locate you as normal.
IMPOSSIBLE STRIKER FEAT 20
ROGUE
Prerequisites Sly Striker
Your attacks are swift and deadly beyond explanation.
Nothing can prevent you from making a sneak attack, even
if your opponent can see every blow coming. Instead of
dealing the damage from Sly Striker, you can deal your full
sneak attack damage to a target even if the target isn’t
flat-footed.
REACTIVE DISTRACTION [reaction] FEAT 20
CONCENTRATE MANIPULATE ROGUE
Prerequisites legendary in Deception, Perfect Distraction
Trigger You would be hit by an attack or targeted by an effect,
or you are within an effect’s area.
Requirements You have Perfect Distraction ready to use.
You reactively switch with your decoy to foil your foe. You use
Perfection Distraction, even if you were observed, as long as
you end the movement of your Sneak while concealed or in a
location with cover or greater cover. Your decoy is targeted
by the attack or effect instead of you. In the case of an area
effect, if your Sneak doesn’t move you out of the area, both
you and the decoy are targeted by the effect.
189
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Core Rulebook
190
Sorcerer
During combat encounters...
You use spells to injure your enemies, influence their minds, and hamper their
movements. You might be too vulnerable to get into melee combat, or your bloodline
might give you abilities that help you hold your own in a brawl. While your magic is
powerful, to conserve your best spells—or when you’ve used them all up—you also
rely on cantrips.
During social encounters...
Your natural charisma makes you good at interacting with people.
While exploring...
You detect the magic around you, finding treasures and warning your adventuring
group of magical traps. When the group encounters mysteries or problems related to
your bloodline, you try to solve them.
In downtime...
You craft magic items or scribe scrolls. Your bloodline might drive you to research
your ancestry or associate with affiliated people or creatures.
You Might...
• Have a strong independent streak, and whether you embrace or reject your
magical heritage, you long to distinguish yourself both as a spellcaster and as an
individual.
• View your lineage with fascination, fear, or something in between—anything from
wholehearted acceptance to vehement rejection.
• Rely on magic items, such as scrolls and wands, to supplement your limited
selection of spells.
Others Probably...
• Marvel at your ability to create magic from thin air and view your abilities with
equal parts admiration and mistrust.
• Consider you less dedicated than studious wizards, devoted clerics, and other
practitioners of magic, since power comes to you naturally.
• Assume you’re as unpredictable as the magic you bring forth, even if your
personality proves otherwise.
You didn’t choose to become a spellcaster—you were born one. There’s magic
in your blood, whether a divinity touched one of your ancestors, a forebear
communed with a primal creature, or a powerful occult ritual influenced your line.
Self-reflection and study allow you to refine your inherent magical skills and unlock new, more
powerful abilities. The power in your blood carries a risk, however, and you constantly face
the choice of whether you’ll rise to become a master spellcaster or fall into destruction.
Initial Proficiencies
At 1st level, you gain the
listed proficiency ranks in
the following statistics. You
are untrained in anything
not listed unless you gain a
better proficiency rank in some
other way.
Perception
Trained in Perception
Saving Throws
Trained in Fortitude
Trained in Reflex
Expert in Will
Skills
Trained in one or more skills
determined by your bloodline
Trained in a number of
additional skills equal to 2 plus
your Intelligence modifier
Attacks
Trained in simple weapons
Trained in unarmed attacks
Defenses
Untrained in all armor
Trained in unarmored defense
Spells
Trained in spell attack rolls of
your spellcasting tradition, as
indicated by your bloodline
Trained in spell DCs of your
spellcasting tradition, as
indicated by your bloodline
KEY ABILITY
CHARISMA
At 1st level, your class gives you
an ability boost to Charisma.
HIT POINTS
6 + your Constitution modifier
You increase your maximum number of
HP by this number at 1st level and every
level thereafter.
CLASSES 3
191
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Class Features
You gain these abilities as a sorcerer. Abilities gained at
higher levels list the requisite levels next to their names.
Ancestry and Background
In addition to the abilities provided by your class at 1st
level, you have the benefits of your selected ancestry and
background, as described in Chapter 2.
Initial Proficiencies
At 1st level, you gain a number of proficiencies that
represent your basic training. These proficiencies are
noted at the start of this class.
Bloodline
Choose a bloodline that gives you your spellcasting talent.
This choice determines the type of spells you cast and
the spell list you choose them from, additional spells you
learn, and additional trained skills. You also gain Focus
Points and special focus spells based on your bloodline.
The bloodlines presented in this book are as follows.
Aberrant: A strange and unknowable influence gives
you occult spells.
Angelic: Holy grace bestows divine spells upon you.
Demonic: A sinful corruption gives you divine spells.
Diabolic: A bond with devils gives you divine spells.
Draconic: The blood of dragons grants you
arcane spells.
Elemental: The power of the elements manifests in
you as primal spells.
Fey: Influence from the fey gives you primal spells.
Hag: The blight of a hag has given you occult spells.
Imperial: An ancient power grants you arcane spells.
Undead: The touch of death gives you divine spells.
See Bloodlines on page 194 for more information.
Sorcerer Spellcasting
Your bloodline provides you with incredible magical
power. You can cast spells using the Cast a Spell activity,
and you can supply material, somatic, and verbal
components when casting spells  (see Casting Spells on
page 302). Because you’re a sorcerer, you can usually
replace material components with somatic components,
so you don’t need to use a spell component pouch.
Each day, you can cast up to three 1st-level spells. You
must know spells to cast them, and you learn them via the
spell repertoire class feature. The number of spells you can
cast each day is called your spell slots.
As you increase in level as a sorcerer, your number of
spells per day increases, as does the highest level of spells
you can cast, as shown on Table 3–17: Sorcerer Spells per
Day on page 193.
Some of your spells require you to attempt a spell attack
roll to see how effective they are, or have your enemies
roll against your spell DC (typically by attempting a saving
throw). Since your key ability is Charisma, your spell
attack rolls and spell DCs use your Charisma modifier.
Details on calculating these statistics appear on page 447.
Heightening Spells
When you get spell slots of 2nd level and higher, you
can fill those slots with stronger versions of lower-level
spells. This increases the spell’s level to match the spell
slot. You must have a spell in your spell repertoire at the
level you want to cast in order to heighten it to that level.
Many spells have specific improvements when they are
heightened to certain levels (page 299). The signature
spells class feature lets you heighten certain spells freely.
Cantrips
A cantrip is a special type of spell that doesn’t use spell slots.
You can cast a cantrip at will, any number of times per day.
A cantrip is always automatically heightened to half your
level rounded up—this is usually equal to the highest level
of spell you can cast as a sorcerer. For example, as a 1stlevel sorcerer, your cantrips are 1st-level spells, and as a
5th-level sorcerer, your cantrips are 3rd-level spells.
TABLE 3–16: SORCERER ADVANCEMENT
Your
Level Class Features
1 Ancestry and background, initial proficiencies,
bloodline, sorcerer spellcasting, spell repertoire
2 Skill feat, sorcerer feat
3 2nd-level spells, general feat, signature spells,
skill increase
4 Skill feat, sorcerer feat
5 3rd-level spells, ability boosts, ancestry feat, magical
fortitude, skill increase
6 Skill feat, sorcerer feat
7 4th-level spells, expert spellcaster, general feat,
skill increase
8 Skill feat, sorcerer feat
9 5th-level spells, ancestry feat, lightning reflexes,
skill increase
10 Ability boosts, skill feat, sorcerer feat
11 6th-level spells, alertness, general feat, simple
weapon expertise, skill increase
12 Skill feat, sorcerer feat
13 7th-level spells, ancestry feat, defensive robes, skill
increase, weapon specialization
14 Skill feat, sorcerer feat
15 8th-level spells, ability boosts, general feat, master
spellcaster, skill increase
16 Skill feat, sorcerer feat
17 9th-level spells, ancestry feat, skill increase
18 Skill feat, sorcerer feat
19 Bloodline paragon, general feat, legendary
spellcaster, skill increase
20 Ability boosts, skill feat, sorcerer feat
Core Rulebook
192
Spell Repertoire
The collection of spells you can cast is called your spell
repertoire. At 1st level, you learn two 1st-level spells of
your choice and four cantrips of your choice, as well as
an additional spell and cantrip from your bloodline (page
194). You choose these from the common spells from the
tradition corresponding to your bloodline, or from other
spells from that tradition to which you have access. You
can cast any spell in your spell repertoire by using a spell
slot of an appropriate spell level.
You add to this spell repertoire as you increase in level.
Each time you get a spell slot (see Table 3–17), you add a
spell of the same level to your spell repertoire. When you
gain access to a new level of spells, your first new spell is
always your bloodline spell, but you can choose the other
spells you gain. At 2nd level, you select another 1st-level
spell; at 3rd level, you gain a new bloodline spell and two
other 2nd-level spells, and so on. When you add spells, you
might choose a higher-level version of a spell you already
have so that you can cast a heightened version of that spell.
Though you gain them at the same rate, your spell slots
and the spells in your spell repertoire are separate. If a
feat or other ability adds a spell to your spell repertoire, it
wouldn’t give you another spell slot, and vice versa.
Swapping Spells in Your Repertoire
As you gain new spells in your spell repertoire, you might
want to replace some of the spells you previously learned.
Each time you gain a level and learn new spells, you can
swap out one of your old spells for a different spell of
TABLE 3–17: SORCERER SPELLS PER DAY
Your Spell Level
Level Cantrips 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th
1 5 3 — — — — — — — — —
2 5 4 — — — — — — — — —
3 5 4 3 — — — — — — — —
4 5 4 4 — — — — — — — —
5 5 4 4 3 — — — — — — —
6 5 4 4 4 — — — — — — —
7 5 4 4 4 3 — — — — — —
8 5 4 4 4 4 — — — — — —
9 5 4 4 4 4 3 — — — — —
10 5 4 4 4 4 4 — — — — —
11 5 4 4 4 4 4 3 — — — —
12 5 4 4 4 4 4 4 — — — —
13 5 4 4 4 4 4 4 3 — — —
14 5 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 — — —
15 5 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 3 — —
16 5 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 — —
17 5 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 3 —
18 5 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 —
19 5 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 1*
20 5 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 1*
* The bloodline paragon class feature gives you a 10th-level spell slot that works a bit differently from other spell slots.
the same level. This spell can be a cantrip, but you can’t
swap out bloodline spells. You can also swap out spells
by retraining during downtime (page 481).
Skill Feats 2nd
At 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a skill
feat. Skill feats appear in Chapter 5 and have the skill
trait. You must be trained or better in the corresponding
skill to select a skill feat.
Sorcerer Feats 2nd
At 2nd level and every even-numbered level, you gain a
sorcerer class feat. These begin on page 198.
General Feats 3rd
At 3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter, you gain a
general feat. General feats are listed in Chapter 5.
Signature Spells 3rd
You’ve learned to cast some of your spells more flexibly.
For each spell level you have access to, choose one spell of
that level to be a signature spell. You don’t need to learn
heightened versions of signature spells separately; instead,
you can heighten these spells freely. If you’ve learned a
signature spell at a higher level than its minimum, you
can also cast all its lower-level versions without learning
those separately. If you swap out a signature spell, you
can choose a replacement signature spell of the same spell
level at which you learned the previous spell. You can also
retrain specifically to change a signature spell to a different
193
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
spell of that level without swapping any spells; this takes as
much time as retraining a spell normally does.
Skill Increases 3rd
At 3rd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a
skill increase. You can use an increase to either become
trained in one skill you’re untrained in, or to increase
your proficiency rank in one skill in which you’re already
trained to expert.
At 7th level, you can use skill increases to become a
master in a skill in which you’re already an expert, and
at 15th level, you can use them to become legendary in a
skill in which you’re already a master.
Ability Boosts 5th
At 5th level and every 5 levels thereafter, you boost four
different ability scores. You can use these ability boosts to
increase your ability scores above 18. Boosting an ability
score increases it by 1 if it’s already 18 or above, or by 2 if
it starts out below 18.
Ancestry Feats 5th
In addition to the ancestry feat you started with, you gain
an ancestry feat at 5th level and every 4 levels thereafter.
The list of ancestry feats available to you can be found in
your ancestry’s entry in Chapter 2.
Magical Fortitude 5th
Magical power has improved your body’s resiliency. Your
proficiency rank for Fortitude saves increases to expert.
Expert Spellcaster 7th
Your inherent magic responds easily and powerfully to
your command. Your proficiency ranks for spell attack
rolls and spell DCs for spells of your bloodline’s tradition
increase to expert.
Lightning Reflexes 9th
Your reflexes are lightning fast. Your proficiency rank for
Reflex saves increases to expert.
Alertness 11th
You remain alert to threats around you. Your proficiency
rank for Perception increases to expert.
Simple Weapon Expertise 11th
Training and magic improved your weapon technique. Your
proficiency rank for simple weapons increases to expert.
Defensive Robes 13th
The flow of magic and your defensive training combine
to help you get out of the way before an attack. Your
proficiency rank in unarmored defense increases to expert.
Weapon Specialization 13th
You’ve learned to inflict grave wounds with your practiced
weapons. You deal 2 additional damage with weapons and
unarmed attacks in which you are an expert. This damage
increases to 3 if you’re a master, and 4 if you’re legendary.
Master Spellcaster 15th
You have achieved mastery over the magic in your blood.
Your proficiency ranks for spell attack rolls and spell DCs
for spells of your bloodline’s tradition increase to master.
Bloodline Paragon 19th
You have perfected the magic in your bloodline. Add
two common 10th-level spells of your tradition to your
repertoire. You gain a single 10th-level spell slot you can
use to cast these spells, using sorcerer spellcasting. Unlike
other spell slots, you don’t gain more 10th-level spells as
you level up, and they can’t be used for abilities that let
you cast spells without expending spell slots or abilities
that give you more spell slots. You can take the Bloodline
Perfection sorcerer feat to gain a second slot.
Legendary Spellcaster 19th
You demonstrate prodigious talent for spellcasting. Your
proficiency ranks for spell attack rolls and spell DCs for
spells of your bloodline’s tradition increase to legendary.
Bloodlines
Choose your bloodline, the source of your power. It has a
major influence on your abilities, determining your spell
list, the tradition of spells you cast, and two trained skills.
Bloodline Spells
Your bloodline grants you bloodline spells, special spells
unique to your lineage. Bloodline spells are a type of focus
spell. It costs 1 Focus Point to cast a focus spell, and you start
with a focus pool of 1 Focus Point. You refill your focus pool
during your daily preparations, and you can regain 1 Focus
Point by spending 10 minutes using the Refocus activity.
Unlike other characters, you don’t need to do anything
specific to Refocus, as the power of the blood flowing
through your veins naturally replenishes your focus pool.
THE BLESSED AND THE DAMNED
Many bloodlines are tied to certain types of creatures,
and the reputations of those creatures might color
how people see you. If you have the blood of demons,
people might fear you; conversely, people of good faiths
might assume your angelic blood puts you on their
side. These preconceptions aren’t necessarily true, and
you can certainly use demonic or infernal powers to do
good. Having a bloodline tied to creatures of a certain
alignment doesn’t have any effect on your own alignment
unless you want it to; your magic is disconnected from
its source. That said, many sorcerers seek out creatures
or organizations associated with their bloodlines, which
can expose them to these forces’ influences.
Core Rulebook
194
Focus spells are automatically heightened to half your
level rounded up. Focus spells don’t require spell slots, nor
can you cast them using spell slots. Taking feats can give
you more focus spells and increase the size of your focus
pool, though your focus pool can never hold more than
3 points. The full rules are on page 300.
Reading a Bloodline Entry
A bloodline entry contains the following information.
Spell List You use this magical tradition and spell list.
Bloodline Skills You become trained in the listed skills.
Granted Spells You automatically add the spells listed here
to your spell repertoire, in addition to those you gain through
sorcerer spellcasting. At 1st level, you gain a cantrip and a
1st-level spell. You learn the other spells on the list as soon as
you gain the ability to cast sorcerer spells of that level.
Bloodline Spells You automatically gain the initial bloodline
spell at 1st level and can gain more by selecting the Advanced
Bloodline and Greater Bloodline feats.
Blood Magic Whenever you cast a bloodline spell using Focus
Points or a granted spell from your bloodline using a spell slot,
you gain a blood magic effect. If the blood magic offers a choice,
make it before resolving the spell. The blood magic effect occurs
after resolving any checks for the spell’s initial effects and,
against a foe, applies only if the spell is a successful attack or
the foe fails its saving throw. If the spell has an area, you must
designate yourself or one target in the area when you cast the
spell to be the target of the blood magic effect. All references
to spell level refer to the level of the spell you cast.
Aberrant
Something speaks to you from beyond the stars
or below the earth. Ancient and unknowable,
this alien influence presses against your mind.
Spell List occult (page 311)
Bloodline Skills Intimidation, Occultism
Granted Spells cantrip: daze; 1st: spider sting; 2nd:
touch of idiocy; 3rd: vampiric touch; 4th: confusion;
5th: black tentacles; 6th: feeblemind; 7th: warp mind; 8th:
uncontrollable dance; 9th: unfathomable song
Bloodline Spells initial: tentacular limbs;
advanced: aberrant whispers; greater:
unusual anatomy
Blood Magic Aberrant whispers shield
one target’s mind or your own,
granting a +2 status bonus to
Will saving throws for 1 round.
Angelic
One of your forebears hailed
from a celestial realm, or your ancestors’
devotion led to their lineage being blessed.
Spell List divine (page 309)
Bloodline Skills Diplomacy, Religion
Granted Spells cantrip: light; 1st: heal; 2nd:
spiritual weapon; 3rd: searing light; 4th: divine
wrath; 5th: flame strike; 6th: blade barrier; 7th: divine decree;
8th: divine aura; 9th: foresight
Bloodline Spells initial: angelic halo; advanced: angelic wings;
greater: celestial brand
Blood Magic An angelic aura protects you or one target,
granting a +1 status bonus to saving throws for 1 round.
Demonic
Demons debase all they touch. One of your ancestors fell
victim to their corruption, and you are burdened by that sin.
Spell List divine (page 309)
Bloodline Skills Intimidation, Religion
Granted Spells cantrip: acid splash; 1st: fear; 2nd: enlarge;
3rd: slow; 4th: divine wrath; 5th: Abyssal plague; 6th:
disintegrate; 7th: divine decree; 8th: divine aura; 9th: implosion
195
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SAMPLE SORCERER Bloodline Spells initial: glutton’s jaws; advanced: swamp of
sloth; greater: Abyssal wrath
Blood Magic The corruption of sin weakens a target’s defenses
or makes you more imposing. Either a target takes a –1 status
penalty to AC for 1 round, or you gain a +1 status bonus to
Intimidation checks for 1 round.
Diabolic
Devils are evil with a silver tongue, and one of your
ancestors dallied in darkness or made an infernal pact.
Spell List divine (page 309)
Bloodline Skills Deception, Religion
Granted Spells cantrip: produce flame; 1st: charm; 2nd: flaming
sphere; 3rd: enthrall; 4th: suggestion; 5th: crushing despair; 6th:
true seeing; 7th: divine decree; 8th: divine aura; 9th: meteor swarm
Bloodline Spells initial: diabolic edict; advanced: embrace the
pit; greater: hellfire plume
Blood Magic Hellfire scorches a target or fills your tongue with
lies. Either a target takes 1 fire damage per spell level (if the spell
already deals initial fire damage, combine this with the spell’s
initial damage before determining weaknesses and resistances),
or you gain a +1 status bonus to Deception checks for 1 round.
Draconic
The blood of dragons flows through your veins. These
beasts are both fearsome in combat and skilled at magic.
Spell List arcane (page 307)
Bloodline Skills Arcana, Intimidation
Granted Spells cantrip: shield; 1st: true strike; 2nd: resist
energy; 3rd: haste; 4th: spell immunity; 5th: chromatic wall;
6th: dragon form; 7th: mask of terror; 8th: prismatic wall; 9th:
overwhelming presence
Bloodline Spells initial: dragon claws; advanced: dragon
breath; greater: dragon wings
Blood Magic Draconic scales grow briefly on you or one target,
granting a +1 status bonus to AC for 1 round.
Dragon Type
At 1st level, choose the type of dragon that influenced your
bloodline. You can’t change your dragon type later. This
affects how some of your bloodline spells function. The
good metallic dragons and their damage types are brass
(fire), bronze (electricity), copper (acid), gold (fire), and
silver (cold). The evil chromatic dragons and their damage
types are black (acid), blue (electricity), green (poison), red
(fire), and white (cold).
Elemental
A genie ancestor or some other elemental influence has
imbued your blood with primal fury, affecting how the
bloodline spells and granted spells marked with an asterisk
(*), as well as your blood magic, function.
Spell List primal (page 314)
Bloodline Skills Intimidation, Nature
Granted Spells cantrip: produce flame*; 1st: burning hands*;
2nd: resist energy; 3rd: fireball*; 4th: freedom of movement;
FEY-TOUCHED
Your blood ties you to the magic of the First
World and the otherworldly fey. Like them, you’re
capricious, charming, and hard to pin down.
ABILITY SCORES
Improve your Charisma first. Good Dexterity, Constitution,
and Wisdom provide solid defenses.
SKILLS
Deception, Diplomacy, Nature, Stealth
BLOODLINE
Fey
HIGHER-LEVEL FEATS
Reach Spell (1st), Primal Evolution (4th), Advanced Bloodline
(6th), Greater Bloodline (10th), Bloodline Focus (12th)
SPELL REPERTOIRE
1st charm, fleet step, summon fey; Cantrips dancing lights,
daze, detect magic, ghost sound, tanglefoot
Core Rulebook
196
5th: elemental form; 6th: repulsion; 7th: energy aegis; 8th:
prismatic wall; 9th: storm of vengeance
Bloodline Spells initial: elemental toss*; advanced: elemental
motion; greater: elemental blast*
Blood Magic Elemental energy surrounds you or a target. Either
you gain a +1 status bonus to Intimidation checks for 1 round, or a
target takes 1 damage per spell level. The damage is bludgeoning
or fire, according to your elemental type (see below). If the spell
already deals that type of damage, combine it with the spell’s
initial damage before determining weaknesses and resistances.
Elemental Type
At 1st level, choose the type of elemental that influenced
your bloodline: air, earth, fire, or water. If your element is
air, you buffet your foes with powerful winds; if it’s earth,
you toss huge chunks of rock; if it’s fire, you incinerate
your foes with flame; and if it’s water, you inundate your
foes with torrents of water. For fire, all marked spells deal
fire damage. For other elements, they deal bludgeoning
damage. You also add the trait of the element you chose.
Fey
Fey whimsy or a tryst in a moonlit grove put the bewitching
magic of the First World into your family’s bloodline.
Spell List primal (page 314)
Bloodline Skills Deception, Nature
Granted Spells cantrip: ghost sound; 1st: charm; 2nd: hideous
laughter; 3rd: enthrall; 4th: suggestion; 5th: cloak of colors;
6th: mislead; 7th: visions of danger; 8th: uncontrollable dance;
9th: resplendent mansion
Bloodline Spells initial: faerie dust; advanced: fey
disappearance; greater: fey glamour
Blood Magic Colorful fey glamours dance around you or one
target, causing them to be concealed for 1 round. Such obvious
concealment can’t be used to Hide.
Hag
A hag long ago cursed your family, or you are a descendant
of a hag or changeling, and their accursed corruption
infests your blood and soul.
Spell List occult (page 311)
Bloodline Skills Deception, Occultism
Granted Spells cantrip: daze; 1st: illusory disguise; 2nd: touch
of idiocy; 3rd: blindness; 4th: outcast’s curse; 5th: mariner’s
curse; 6th: baleful polymorph; 7th: warp mind; 8th: spiritual
epidemic; 9th: nature’s enmity
Bloodline Spells initial: jealous hex; advanced: horrific visage;
greater: you’re mine
197
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
1ST LEVEL
COUNTERSPELL [reaction] FEAT 1
ABJURATION SORCERER
Trigger A creature casts a spell that you have in your repertoire.
Requirements You have an unexpended spell slot you could
use to cast the triggering spell.
When a foe Casts a Spell you know and you can see its
manifestations, you can use your own magic to disrupt it.
You expend one of your spell slots to counter the triggering
creature’s casting of a spell that you have in your repertoire.
You lose your spell slot as if you had cast the triggering spell.
You then attempt to counteract the triggering spell (page 458).
Special This feat has the trait corresponding to the tradition
of spells you cast (arcane, divine, natural, or occult).
DANGEROUS SORCERY FEAT 1
SORCERER
Your legacy grants you great destructive power. When you
Cast a Spell from your spell slots, if the spell deals damage and
doesn’t have a duration, you gain a status bonus to that spell’s
damage equal to the spell’s level.
FAMILIAR FEAT 1
SORCERER
An animal serves you and assists your spellcasting. You gain a
familiar (rules for familiars are found on page 217).
REACH SPELL [one-action] FEAT 1
CONCENTRATE METAMAGIC SORCERER
You can extend the range of your spells. If the next action you
use is to Cast a Spell that has a range, increase that spell’s range
by 30 feet. As is standard for increasing spell ranges, if the spell
normally has a range of touch, you extend its range to 30 feet.
WIDEN SPELL [one-action] FEAT 1
MANIPULATE METAMAGIC SORCERER
You manipulate the energy of your spell, causing it to affect a
wider area. If the next action you use is to Cast a Spell that has
an area of a burst, cone, or line and does not have a duration,
increase the area of that spell. Add 5 feet to the radius of a
burst that normally has a radius of at least 10 feet (a burst
with a smaller radius is not affected). Add 5 feet to the length
of a cone or line that is normally 15 feet long or smaller, and
add 10 feet to the length of a larger cone or line.
2ND LEVEL
CANTRIP EXPANSION FEAT 2
SORCERER
You better understand the basic power of your bloodline. Add
two additional cantrips from your spell list to your repertoire.
ENHANCED FAMILIAR FEAT 2
SORCERER
Prerequisites a familiar
KEY TERMS
You’ll see the following key terms in many sorcerer abilities.
Metamagic: Actions with the metamagic trait tweak
the properties of your spells. These actions usually come
from metamagic feats. You must use a metamagic action
directly before Casting the Spell you want to alter. If you
use any action (including free actions and reactions) other
than Cast a Spell directly after, you waste the benefits of
the metamagic action. Any additional effects added by a
metamagic action are part of the spell’s effect, not of the
metamagic action itself.
Blood Magic Spiteful curses punish your foes. The first creature
that deals damage to you before the end of your next turn takes 2
mental damage per spell level and must attempt a basic Will save.
Imperial
One of your ancestors was a mortal who mastered magic.
Such magical blood can remain latent for generations,
but in you it manifested in full.
Spell List arcane (page 307)
Bloodline Skills Arcana, Society
Granted Spells cantrip: detect magic; 1st: magic missile; 2nd:
dispel magic; 3rd: haste; 4th: dimension door; 5th: prying
eye; 6th: disintegrate; 7th: prismatic spray; 8th: maze; 9th:
prismatic sphere
Bloodline Spells initial: ancestral memories; advanced: extend
spell; greater: arcane countermeasure
Blood Magic A surge of ancestral memories grants you or one
target a +1 status bonus to skill checks for 1 round.
Undead
The touch of undeath runs through your blood. Your
family tree might contain powerful undead, like a
vampire, or perhaps you died and returned a bit different.
Spell List divine (page 309)
Bloodline Skills Intimidation, Religion
Granted Spells cantrip: chill touch; 1st: harm; 2nd: false life; 3rd:
bind undead; 4th: talking corpse; 5th: cloudkill; 6th: vampiric
exsanguination; 7th: finger of death; 8th: horrid wilting; 9th:
wail of the banshee
Bloodline Spells initial: touch of undeath; advanced: drain life;
greater: grasping grave
Blood Magic Necromantic energy flows through you or one
target. Either you gain temporary Hit Points equal to the
spell’s level for 1 round, or a target takes 1 negative damage
per spell level (if the spell already deals initial negative
damage, combine this with the spell’s initial damage before
determining weaknesses and resistances).
Sorcerer Feats
At every level at which you gain a sorcerer feat, you can
select one of the following feats. You must satisfy any
prerequisites before taking the feat.
Core Rulebook
198
You infuse your familiar with additional magical energy. You can select four familiar or master
abilities each day, instead of two.
4TH LEVEL
ARCANE EVOLUTION FEAT 4
ARCANE SORCERER
Prerequisites bloodline that grants arcane spells
Your arcane legacy grants you an exceptional aptitude for intellectual and academic
pursuits. You become trained in one skill of your choice. Additionally, you keep a book of
arcane spells similar to a wizard’s spellbook. You add all the spells in your spell repertoire
to this book for free, and you can add additional arcane spells to the book by paying the
appropriate cost and using your Arcana skill, similarly to how a wizard can Learn Spells to
add those spells to his spellbook.
During your daily preparations, choose any one spell from your book of arcane spells.
If it isn’t in your spell repertoire, add it to your spell repertoire until the next time you
prepare. If it’s already in your spell repertoire, add it as an additional signature spell
for that day.
BESPELL WEAPON [free-action] FEAT 4
SORCERER
Frequency once per turn
Requirements Your most recent action was to cast a non-cantrip spell.
You siphon the residual energy from the last spell you cast into one weapon you’re wielding.
Until the end of your turn, the weapon deals an extra 1d6 damage of a type depending on
the school of the spell you just cast.
• Abjuration force damage
• Conjuration or Transmutation the same type as the weapon
• Divination, Enchantment, or Illusion mental damage
• Evocation a type the spell dealt, or force damage if the spell didn’t deal damage
• Necromancy negative damage
DIVINE EVOLUTION FEAT 4
DIVINE SORCERER
Prerequisites bloodline that grants divine spells
The divine might provided by your bloodline flows through you. You gain an additional
spell slot of your highest level, which you can use only to cast your choice of heal or
harm. You can cast either of these spells using that spell slot, even if they aren’t in your
spell repertoire.
OCCULT EVOLUTION FEAT 4
OCCULT SORCERER
Prerequisites bloodline that grants occult spells
Glimpses of the obscure secrets of the universe loan you power. You become trained in one
skill of your choice. Additionally, once per day, you can spend 1 minute to choose one mental
occult spell you don’t know and add it to your spell repertoire. You lose this temporary spell
the next time you make your daily preparations (though you can use this ability to add it
again later).
PRIMAL EVOLUTION FEAT 4
PRIMAL SORCERER
Prerequisites bloodline that grants primal spells
You can call upon the creatures of the wild for aid. You gain an additional spell slot of
your highest level, which you can use only to cast summon animal or summon plants and
fungi. You can cast either of these spells using that spell slot, even if it they aren’t in your
spell repertoire.
SORCERER FEATS
If you need to look up a sorcerer
feat by name instead of by level,
use this table.
Feat Level
Advanced Bloodline 6
Arcane Evolution 4
Bespell Weapon 6
Bloodline Conduit 20
Bloodline Focus 12
Bloodline Perfection 20
Bloodline Resistance 8
Bloodline Wellspring 18
Cantrip Expansion 2
Counterspell 1
Crossblooded Evolution 8
Dangerous Sorcery 1
Divine Evolution 4
Effortless Concentration 16
Enhanced Familiar 2
Familiar 1
Greater Bloodline 10
Greater Crossblooded 18
Evolution
Greater Mental Evolution 16
Greater Vital Evolution 16
Interweave Dispel 14
Magic Sense 12
Metamagic Mastery 20
Occult Evolution 4
Overwhelming Energy 10
Primal Evolution 4
Quickened Casting 10
Reach Spell 1
Reflect Spell 14
Steady Spellcasting 6
Widen Spell 1
199
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SAMPLE SORCERER 6TH LEVEL
ADVANCED BLOODLINE FEAT 6
SORCERER
Prerequisites bloodline spell
You have studied your bloodline to learn the secrets of its
magic. You gain the advanced bloodline spell associated with
your bloodline. Increase the number of Focus Points in your
focus pool by 1.
STEADY SPELLCASTING FEAT 6
SORCERER
You are confident in your spellcasting technique, and you
are more easily able to retain your concentration when you
Cast a Spell. If a reaction would disrupt your spellcasting
action, attempt a DC 15 flat check. If you succeed, your action
isn’t disrupted.
8TH LEVEL
BLOODLINE RESISTANCE FEAT 8
SORCERER
Your magical blood makes you more resistant to magic. You
gain a +1 status bonus to saving throws against spells and
magical effects.
CROSSBLOODED EVOLUTION FEAT 8
SORCERER
Odd interactions in your bloodline provide you with
unexpected spells. You can have one spell in your spell
repertoire from a tradition other than the one that matches
your bloodline. You cast that spell as a spell from your
bloodline’s tradition. You can swap which spell you add and
from which tradition as you could any other sorcerer spell, but
you can’t have more than one spell from another tradition in
your spell repertoire at the same time using this feat.
10TH LEVEL
GREATER BLOODLINE FEAT 10
SORCERER
Prerequisites bloodline spell
Further communion with the legacy of your bloodline has
uncovered greater secrets. You gain the greater bloodline spell
associated with your bloodline. Increase the number of Focus
Points in your focus pool by 1.
OVERWHELMING ENERGY [one-action] FEAT 10
MANIPULATE METAMAGIC SORCERER
You alter your spells to overcome resistances. If the next
action you use is to Cast a Spell, the spell ignores an amount
of the target’s resistance to acid, cold, electricity, fire, or sonic
damage equal to your level. This applies to all damage the
spell deals, including persistent damage and damage caused
by an ongoing effect of the spell, such as the wall created by
wall of fire. A creature’s immunities are unaffected.
DEMONBLOOD
The grotesque and chaotic creatures of the Abyss left
their mark on your family’s bloodline. You have a
vicious streak and find wanton destruction thrilling.
ABILITY SCORES
Your Charisma is most important, and boosting Strength,
Dexterity, and Constitution make you a better combatant.
SKILLS
Athletics, Deception, Intimidation, Religion
BLOODLINE
Demonic
HIGHER-LEVEL FEATS
Dangerous Sorcery (1st), Divine Evolution (4th), Advanced
Bloodline (6th), Bloodline Resistance (8th), Greater
Bloodline (10th), Bloodline Focus (12th)
SPELL REPERTOIRE
1st bane, fear, harm; Cantrips acid splash, chill touch, detect
magic, light, shield
Core Rulebook
200
QUICKENED CASTING [free-action] FEAT 10
CONCENTRATE METAMAGIC SORCERER
Frequency once per day
In a mentally strenuous process, you modify your casting of a
spell to take less time. If your next action is to cast a sorcerer
cantrip or a sorcerer spell that is at least 2 levels lower than
the highest level sorcerer spell you can cast, reduce the
number of actions to cast it by 1 (minimum 1 action).
12TH LEVEL
BLOODLINE FOCUS FEAT 12
SORCERER
Prerequisites bloodline spell
Your focus recovers faster. If you have spent at least 2 Focus
Points since the last time you Refocused, you recover 2 Focus
Points when you Refocus instead of 1.
MAGIC SENSE FEAT 12
DETECTION DIVINATION SORCERER
You have a literal sixth sense for magic. You can sense the
presence of magic auras as though you were always using a
1st-level detect magic spell. This detects magic in your field of
vision only. When you Seek, you gain the benefits of a 3rd-level
detect magic spell on things you see (in addition to the normal
benefits of Seeking). You can turn this sense off and on with a
free action at the start or the end of your turn.
14TH LEVEL
INTERWEAVE DISPEL [one-action] FEAT 14
METAMAGIC SORCERER
Prerequisites dispel magic in your spell repertoire
You weave dispelling energy into a spell, sending both effects
at a foe. If your next action is to cast a single-target spell
against a creature, and you either hit the foe with the spell
attack roll or the foe fails its saving throw, you can cast dispel
magic on the foe as a free action, expending a spell slot as
normal and targeting one spell effect affecting the foe.
REFLECT SPELL FEAT 14
SORCERER
Prerequisites Counterspell
When you successfully use Counterspell to counteract a
spell that affects targeted creatures or an area, you can turn
that spell’s effect back on its caster. When reflected, the spell
affects only the original caster, even if it’s an area spell or it
would normally affect more than one creature. The original
caster can attempt a save and use other defenses against the
reflected spell as normal.
16TH LEVEL
EFFORTLESS CONCENTRATION [reaction[free-action] FEAT 16
SORCERER
Trigger Your turn begins.
You maintain a spell with hardly a thought. You immediately
gain the effects of the Sustain a Spell action, allowing you to
extend the duration of one of your active sorcerer spells.
GREATER MENTAL EVOLUTION FEAT 16
ARCANE SORCERER
Prerequisites Arcane Evolution or Occult Evolution
Your bloodline’s deep connection to mental essence greatly
enhances your spell repertoire. Add one spell to your spell
repertoire for each spell level you can cast.
GREATER VITAL EVOLUTION FEAT 16
DIVINE SORCERER
Prerequisites Divine Evolution or Primal Evolution
Vital power surges through you like a font of energy. Twice
per day, you can cast a spell after you’ve run out of spell slots
of the appropriate spell level; the two spells you cast with this
feat must be of different spell levels.
18TH LEVEL
BLOODLINE WELLSPRING FEAT 18
SORCERER
Prerequisites Bloodline Focus
Your blood’s power replenishes your focus. If you have spent
at least 3 Focus Points since the last time you Refocused, you
recover 3 Focus Points when you Refocus instead of 1.
GREATER CROSSBLOODED EVOLUTION FEAT 18
SORCERER
Prerequisites Crossblooded Evolution
Your bloodline is extraordinarily complex. You can have up
to three spells from other traditions in your spell repertoire,
rather than just one. These spells must each be of a different
spell level, but they don’t need to be from the same tradition.
20TH LEVEL
BLOODLINE CONDUIT [one-action] FEAT 20
METAMAGIC SORCERER
Frequency once per minute
Your inborn magical nature lets you redirect ambient energies
to fuel your spells. If your next action is to Cast a Spell of
5th level or lower that has no duration, you don’t expend the
spell’s slot when you cast it.
BLOODLINE PERFECTION FEAT 20
SORCERER
Prerequisites bloodline paragon
You command the ultimate powers of your bloodline and
tradition. You gain an additional 10th-level spell slot.
METAMAGIC MASTERY FEAT 20
SORCERER
Altering your spells doesn’t take any longer than casting them
normally. You can use metamagic single actions as free actions..
201
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Core Rulebook
202
Wizard
During combat Encounters...
You likely try to stay out of the fray, carefully judging when to use your spells. You
save your most powerful magic to incapacitate threatening foes and use your cantrips
when only weaker foes remain. When enemies pull out tricks like invisibility or flight,
you answer with spells like glitterdust or earth bind, leveling the field for your allies.
During social encounters...
You provide a well of knowledge about arcane matters and solve arguments with logic.
While exploring...
You locate magical auras and determine the arcane significance of magical writing
or phenomena you uncover. When you run across an unusual obstacle to further
exploration, you probably have a scroll that will make it easier to overcome.
In downtime...
You learn new spells, craft magic items, or scribe scrolls for your party, and seek
out new and exciting formulas in addition to spells. You might even forge scholarly
connections and establish a school or guild of your own.
You Might...
• Have an unquenchable intellectual curiosity about how everything in the world
around you works—magic in particular.
• Believe fervently that your school of magic is superior (if you’re a specialist) or that
true mastery of magic requires knowledge of all schools (if you’re a universalist).
• Use esoteric jargon and technical terms to precisely describe the minutiae of
magical effects, even though the difference is probably lost on other people.
Others Probably...
• Consider you to be incredibly powerful and potentially dangerous.
• Fear what your magic can do to their minds, bodies, and souls, and ask that you
avoid casting spells in polite company, as few can identify whether one of your
spells is harmless or malevolent until it’s too late.
• Assume you can easily solve all their problems, from dangerous weather to poor
crop yields, and ask you for spells that can help them get whatever they desire.
You are an eternal student of the arcane secrets of the universe, using your
mastery of magic to cast powerful and devastating spells. You treat magic like a
science, cross-referencing the latest texts on practical spellcraft with ancient esoteric tomes
to discover and understand how magic works. Yet magical theory is vast, and there’s no
way you can study it all. You either specialize in one of the eight schools of magic, gaining
deeper understanding of the nuances of those spells above all others, or favor a broader
approach that emphasizes the way all magic comes together at the expense of depth.
INITIAL PROFICIENCIES
At 1st level, you gain the
listed proficiency ranks in
the following statistics. You
are untrained in anything
not listed unless you gain a
better proficiency rank in some
other way.
PERCEPTION
Trained in Perception
SAVING THROWS
Trained in Fortitude
Trained in Reflex
Expert in Will
SKILLS
Trained in Arcana
Trained in a number of additional
skills equal to 2 plus your
Intelligence modifier
ATTACKS
Trained in the club, crossbow,
dagger, heavy crossbow, and
staff
Trained in unarmed attacks
DEFENSES
Untrained in all armor
Trained in unarmored defense
SPELLS
Trained in arcane spell attacks
Trained in arcane spell DCs
CLASSES 3
203
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
KEY ABILITY
INTELLIGENCE
At 1st level, your class gives you
an ability boost to Intelligence.
HIT POINTS
6 plus your Constitution modifier
You increase your maximum number of
HP by this number at 1st level and every
level thereafter.
Class Features
You gain these abilities as a wizard. Abilities gained at
higher levels list the levels next to their names.
Ancestry and Background
In addition to the abilities provided by your class at 1st
level, you have the benefits of your selected ancestry and
background, as described in Chapter 2.
Initial Proficiencies
At 1st level, you gain a number of proficiencies that
represent your basic training. These proficiencies are
noted at the start of this class.
Arcane Spellcasting
Through dedicated study and practice, you can harness
arcane power to cast spells. You can cast arcane spells
using the Cast a Spell activity, and you can supply
material, somatic, and verbal components when casting
spells (see Casting Spells on page 302).
At 1st level, you can prepare up to two 1st-level spells
and five cantrips each morning from the spells in your
spellbook (see below), plus one extra cantrip and spell of
your chosen school of each level you can cast if you are
a specialist wizard. Prepared spells remain available to
you until you cast them or until you prepare your spells
again. The number of spells you can prepare is called
your spell slots.
As you increase in level as a wizard, your number of
spell slots and the highest level of spells you can cast from
spell slots increase, shown in Table 3–19: Wizard Spells
per Day on page 205.
Some of your spells require you to attempt a spell attack
roll to see how effective they are, or have your enemies roll
against your spell DC (typically by attempting a saving
throw). Since your key ability is Intelligence, your spell
attack rolls and spell DCs use your Intelligence modifier.
Details on calculating these statistics appear on page 447.
Heightening Spells
When you get spell slots of 2nd level and higher, you can
fill those slots with stronger versions of lower-level spells.
This increases the spell’s level, heightening it to match the
spell slot. Many spells have specific improvements when
they are heightened to certain levels.
Cantrips
A cantrip is a special type of spell that doesn’t use spell
slots. You can cast a cantrip at will, any number of times
per day. A cantrip is always automatically heightened to
half your level rounded up—this is usually equal to the
highest level of spell you can cast as a wizard. For example,
as a 1st-level wizard, your cantrips are 1st-level spells, and
as a 5th-level wizard, your cantrips are 3rd-level spells.
Spellbook
Every arcane spell has a written version, usually recorded
in a spellbook. You start with a spellbook worth 10 sp
or less (as detailed on page 291), which you receive for
free and must study to prepare your spells each day. The
spellbook contains your choice of 10 arcane cantrips and
five 1st-level arcane spells. You choose these from the
common spells on the arcane spell list from this book
(page 307) or from other arcane spells you gain access to.
Your spellbook’s form and name are up to you. It might
be a musty, leather-bound tome or an assortment of thin
metal disks connected to a brass ring; its name might be
esoteric, like The Crimson Libram, or something more
academic, like A Field Study in Practical Transmutation.
Each time you gain a level, you add two more arcane
spells to your spellbook, of any level of spell you can cast.
You can also use the Arcana skill to add other spells that
you find in your adventures, as described on page 241.
Arcane School
Many arcane spellcasters delve deeply into a single school
of magic in an attempt to master its secrets. If you want to
be a specialist wizard, choose a school in which to specialize.
TABLE 3–18: WIZARD ADVANCEMENT
Your
Level Class Features
1 Ancestry and background, initial proficiencies, arcane
spellcasting, arcane school, arcane bond, arcane thesis,
wizard feat
2 Skill feat, wizard feat
3 2nd-level spells, general feat, skill increase
4 Skill feat, wizard feat
5 3rd-level spells, ability boosts, ancestry feat, lightning
reflexes, skill increase
6 Skill feat, wizard feat
7 4th-level spells, expert spellcaster, general feat,
skill increase
8 Skill feat, wizard feat
9 5th-level spells, ancestry feat, magical fortitude,
skill increase
10 Ability boosts, skill feat, wizard feat
11 6th-level spells, alertness, general feat, skill increase,
wizard weapon expertise
12 Skill feat, wizard feat
13 7th-level spells, ancestry feat, defensive robes, skill
increase, weapon specialization
14 Skill feat, wizard feat
15 8th-level spells, ability boosts, general feat, master
spellcaster, skill increase
16 Skill feat, wizard feat
17 9th-level spells, ancestry feat, resolve, skill increase
18 Skill feat, wizard feat
19 Archwizard’s spellcraft, legendary archwizard,
general feat, skill increase
20 Ability boosts, skill feat, wizard feat
Core Rulebook
204
You gain additional spells and spell slots for spells of your
school. Arcane schools are described in detail on page 207.
If you don’t choose a school, you’re a universalist, a
wizard who believes that the path to true knowledge of
magic requires a multidisciplinary understanding of all
eight schools working together. Though a universalist lacks
the focus of a specialist wizard, they have greater flexibility.
Universalist wizards are described on page 209.
Arcane Bond
You place some of your magical power in a bonded item.
Each day when you prepare your spells, you can designate
a single item you own as your bonded item. This is typically
an item associated with spellcasting, such as a wand, ring,
or staff, but you are free to designate a weapon or other
item. You gain the Drain Bonded Item free action.
DRAIN BONDED ITEM [free-action]
ARCANE WIZARD
Frequency once per day
Requirements You haven’t acted yet on your turn.
You expend the power stored in your bonded item. During your
turn, you gain the ability to cast one spell you prepared today
and already cast, without spending a spell slot. You must still
Cast the Spell and meet the spell’s other requirements.
Arcane Thesis
During your studies to become a full-fledged wizard, you
produced a thesis of unique magical research on one of a
variety of topics. You gain a special benefit depending on
TABLE 3–19: WIZARD SPELLS PER DAY
Your Spell Level
Level Cantrips 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th
1 5 2 — — — — — — — — —
2 5 3 — — — — — — — — —
3 5 3 2 — — — — — — — —
4 5 3 3 — — — — — — — —
5 5 3 3 2 — — — — — — —
6 5 3 3 3 — — — — — — —
7 5 3 3 3 2 — — — — — —
8 5 3 3 3 3 — — — — — —
9 5 3 3 3 3 2 — — — — —
10 5 3 3 3 3 3 — — — — —
11 5 3 3 3 3 3 2 — — — —
12 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 — — — —
13 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 2 — — —
14 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 — — —
15 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 2 — —
16 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 — —
17 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 2 —
18 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 —
19 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 1*
20 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 1*
* The archwizard’s spellcraft class feature gives you a 10th-level spell slot that works a bit differently from other spell slots.
the topic of your thesis research. The arcane thesis topics
presented in this book are below; your specific thesis
probably has a much longer and more technical title like
“On the Methods of Spell Interpolation and the Genesis
of a New Understanding of the Building Blocks of Magic.”
Improved Familiar Attunement
You’ve long held that fine-tuning the magic that bonds
wizard and familiar can improve the mystic connection,
compared to the safe yet generic bond most wizards
currently use. You’ve formed such a pact with your familiar,
gaining more advantages from it than most wizards. You
gain the Familiar wizard feat as a bonus feat. Your familiar
gains an extra ability, and it gains an additional extra
ability when you reach 6th, 12th, and 18th levels.
Your connection with your familiar alters your arcane
bond class feature so that you store your magical energy
in your familiar, rather than an item you own; you also
gain the Drain Familiar free action instead of Drain
Bonded Item. Drain Familiar can be used any time an
ability would allow you to use Drain Bonded Item and
functions identically, except that you draw magic from
your familiar instead of an item.
Metamagical Experimentation
You’ve realized that the practice known as metamagic is a
holdover from a time long ago, when wizards had to work
out their own spells and variations rather than rely on spells
recorded by others and passed down over the years. This
allows you efficient access to various metamagic effects.
205
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
You gain a 1st-level metamagic wizard feat as a bonus
feat. Starting at 4th level, during your daily preparations,
you can gain a metamagic wizard feat of your choice that
has a level requirement of no more than half your level,
which you can use until your next daily preparations.
Spell Blending
You theorize that spell slots are a shorthand for an
underlying energy that powers all spellcasting, and
you’ve found a way to tinker with the hierarchy of spell
slots, combining them to fuel more powerful spells.
When you make your daily preparations, you can trade
two spell slots of the same level for a bonus spell slot of
up to 2 levels higher than the traded spell slots. You can
exchange as many spell slots as you have available.
Bonus spell slots must be of a level you can normally
cast, and each bonus spell slot must be of a different
spell level. You can also trade any spell slot for two
additional cantrips, though you cannot trade more
than one spell slot at a time for additional cantrips in
this way.
Spell Substitution
You don’t accept the fact that once spells are prepared,
they can’t be changed until your next daily preparation,
and you have uncovered a shortcut allowing you to
substitute new spells for those you originally prepared.
You can spend 10 minutes to empty one of your
prepared spell slots and prepare a different spell from
your spellbook in its place. If you are interrupted during
such a swap, the original spell remains prepared and can
still be cast. You can try again to swap out the spell later,
but you must start the process over again.
Wizard Feats
At 1st level and every even-numbered level thereafter, you
gain a wizard class feat. These feats begin on page 209.
Skill Feats 2nd
At 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain
a skill feat. Skill feats can be found in Chapter 5 and
have the skill trait. You must be trained or better in the
corresponding skill to select a skill feat.
General Feats 3rd
At 3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter, you gain a
general feat. General feats are listed in Chapter 5.
Skill Increases 3rd
At 3rd level and every 2 levels thereafter, you gain a skill
increase. You can use this increase either to increase your
proficiency rank to trained in one skill you’re untrained
in, or to increase your proficiency rank in one skill in
which you’re already trained to expert.
At 7th level, you can use skill increases to increase
your proficiency rank to master in a skill in which you’re
SAMPLE SPELLBOOK
You can fill your spellbook with whichever spells you like,
but the list below covers a good selection of starter spells
for a 1st-level wizard. These are the exact spells found
in Structure and Interpretation of Arcane Magic, a basic
spellbook used by arcane academies and master wizards
to teach apprentices good habits in arcane research.
Cantrips: Acid splash, detect magic, electric arc, light,
mage hand, message, prestidigitation, ray of frost, shield,
and study aura.
1st Level: Burning hands, color spray, grease, mage
armor, and magic missile, plus one spell of your school if
you’re a specialist wizard.
Core Rulebook
206
already an expert, and at 15th level, you can use them to
increase your proficiency rank to legendary in a skill in
which you’re already a master.
Ability Boosts 5th
At 5th level and every 5 levels thereafter, you boost four
different ability scores. You can use these ability boosts to
increase your ability scores above 18. Boosting an ability
score increases it by 1 if it’s already 18 or above, or by 2
if it starts out below 18.
Ancestry Feats 5th
In addition to the ancestry feat you started with, you gain
an ancestry feat at 5th level and every 4 levels thereafter.
The list of ancestry feats available to you can be found in
your ancestry’s entry in Chapter 2.
Lightning Reflexes 5th
Your reflexes are lightning fast. Your proficiency rank for
Reflex saves increases to expert.
Expert Spellcaster 7th
Extended practice of the arcane has improved your
capabilities. Your proficiency ranks for arcane spell
attack rolls and spell DCs increase to expert.
Magical Fortitude 9th
Magical power has improved your body’s resiliency. Your
proficiency rank for Fortitude saves increases to expert.
Alertness 11th
You remain alert to threats around you. Your proficiency
rank for Perception increases to expert.
Wizard Weapon Expertise 11th
Through a combination of magic and training, you’ve
learned how to wield wizard weapons more effectively.
You gain expert proficiency in the club, crossbow,
dagger, heavy crossbow, and staff.
Defensive Robes 13th
The flow of magic and your training combine to help
you avoid attacks. Your proficiency rank in unarmored
defense increases to expert.
Weapon Specialization 13th
You’ve learned how to inflict greater injuries with the
weapons you know best. You deal an additional 2 damage
with weapons and unarmed attacks in which you are an
expert. This damage increases to 3 if you’re a master, and
4 if you’re legendary.
Master Spellcaster 15th
You command superlative spellcasting ability. Your
proficiency ranks for arcane spell attack rolls and spell
DCs increase to master.
Resolve 17th
You’ve steeled your mind with resolve. Your proficiency
rank for Will saves increases to master. When you roll a
success at a Will save, you get a critical success instead.
Archwizard’s Spellcraft 19TH
You command the most potent arcane magic and can
cast a spell of truly incredible power. You gain a single
10th-level spell slot and can prepare a spell in that slot
using arcane spellcasting. Unlike with other spell slots,
you don’t gain more 10th-level spells as you level up,
though you can take the Archwizard’s Might feat to gain
a second slot.
Legendary Spellcaster 19th
You are a consummate spellcaster, with a comprehensive
understanding of both arcane theory and practical
spellcraft. Your proficiency ranks for arcane spell attack
rolls and spell DCs increase to legendary.
Arcane Schools
If you specialize in an arcane school, rather than studying
each school equally (as universalists do), you gain an
extra spell slot for each level of spell you can cast. You can
prepare only spells of your chosen arcane school in these
extra slots. In addition, you can prepare an extra cantrip
of your chosen school. You also add another arcane spell
of your chosen school to your spellbook.
You learn a school spell, a special type of spell taught to
students of your arcane school. School spells are a type of
focus spell. It costs 1 Focus Point to cast a focus spell, and
you start with a focus pool of 1 Focus Point. You refill
your focus pool during your daily preparations, and you
can regain 1 Focus Point by spending 10 minutes using
the Refocus activity to study your spellbook or perform
arcane research.
Focus spells are automatically heightened to half your
level rounded up. Focus spells don’t require spell slots,
nor can you cast them using spell slots. Certain feats can
give you more focus spells and increase the size of your
focus pool, though your focus pool can never hold more
than 3 Focus Points. The full rules for focus spells appear
on page 300.
Abjuration
As an abjurer, you master the art of protection, strengthening
defenses, preventing attacks, and even turning magic
against itself. You understand that an ounce of prevention
is worth a pound of cure. You add one 1st-level abjuration
spell (such as feather fall) to your spellbook. You learn the
protective ward school spell (page 407).
Conjuration
As a conjurer, you summon creatures and objects from
places beyond, and use magic to transport to distant locales.
207
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SAMPLE WIZARD You understand that the true key to victory is strength in
numbers. You add one 1st-level conjuration spell (such as
summon animal) to your spellbook. You learn the augment
summoning school spell (page 406).
Divination
As a diviner, you master remote viewing and prescience,
learning information that can transform investigations,
research, and battle strategies. You understand that
knowledge is power. You add one 1st-level divination
spell (such as true strike) to your spellbook. You learn the
diviner’s sight school spell (page 406).
Enchantment
As an enchanter, you use magic to manipulate
others’ minds. You might use your abilities
to subtly influence others or seize control
over them. You understand that the mind
surpasses matter. You add one 1st-level
enchantment spell (such as charm) to your
spellbook. You learn the charming words
school spell (page 406).
Evocation
As an evoker, you revel in the raw power of
magic, using it to create and destroy with ease.
You can call forth elements, forces, and energy to
devastate your foes or to assist you in other ways. You
understand that the most direct approach is the most
elegant. You add one 1st-level evocation spell (such as
shocking grasp) to your spellbook. You learn the force bolt
school spell (page 407).
Illusion
As an illusionist, you use magic to create images, figments,
and phantasms to baffle your enemies. You understand
that perception is reality. You add one 1st-level illusion
spell (such as illusory object) to your spellbook. You learn
the warped terrain school spell (page 407).
Necromancy
As a necromancer, you call upon the powers of life
and death. While your school is often vilified for its
association with raising the undead, you understand that
control over life also means control over healing. You
add one 1st-level necromancy spell (such as grim tendrils)
to your spellbook. You learn the call of the grave school
spell (page 406).
Transmutation
As a transmuter, you alter the physical properties of things,
transforming creatures, objects, the natural world, and
even yourself at your whim. You understand that change
is inevitable. You add one 1st-level transmutation spell
(such as magic weapon) to your spellbook. You learn the
physical boost school spell (page 407).
CONJURER
Your magic summons creatures, transports you, and
creates useful items. You know about odd creatures
and distant realms.
ABILITY SCORES
Prioritize Intelligence. Dexterity, Constitution, and
Wisdom round out your defenses.
SKILLS
Arcana, Crafting, Diplomacy, Nature, Occultism, Religion,
Society
SPECIALIZATION
Conjuration
THESIS
Improved Familiar Attunement
HIGHER-LEVEL FEATS
Enhanced Familiar (2nd), Advanced School Spell (8th),
Effortless Concentration (16th)
Core Rulebook
208
Universalist Wizards
Instead of specializing narrowly in an arcane school, you
can become a universalist wizard—by studying all the
schools equally, you devote yourself to understanding
the full breadth of the arcane arts. For each level of spell
you can cast, you can use Drain Bonded item once per
day to recall a spell of that level (instead of using it only
once per day in total). You gain an extra wizard class
feat, and you add one 1st-level spell of your choice to
your spellbook.
Wizard Feats
At each level that you gain a wizard feat, you can
select one of the following feats. You must satisfy any
prerequisites before taking the feat.
1ST LEVEL
COUNTERSPELL [reaction] FEAT 1
ABJURATION ARCANE WIZARD
Trigger A creature Casts a Spell that you have prepared.
When a foe Casts a Spell and you can see its manifestations,
you can use your own magic to disrupt it. You expend a
prepared spell to counter the triggering creature’s casting of
that same spell. You lose your spell slot as if you had cast the
triggering spell. You then attempt to counteract the triggering
spell (page 458).
ESCHEW MATERIALS FEAT 1
WIZARD
You can use clever workarounds to replicate the arcane essence
of certain materials. When Casting a Spell that requires material
components, you can provide these material components without
a spell component pouch by drawing intricate replacement sigils
in the air. Unlike when providing somatic components, you still
must have a hand completely free. This doesn’t remove the need
for any materials listed in the spell’s cost entry.
FAMILIAR FEAT 1
WIZARD
You make a pact with creature that serves you and assists your
spellcasting. You gain a familiar (page 217).
HAND OF THE APPRENTICE FEAT 1
WIZARD
Prerequisites universalist wizard
You can magically hurl your weapon at your foe. You gain the
hand of the apprentice universalist spell. Universalist spells
are a type of focus spell, much like school spells. You start
with a focus pool of 1 Focus Point. See Arcane Schools on page
207 for more information about focus spells.
209
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
ENHANCED FAMILIAR FEAT 2
WIZARD
Prerequisites a familiar
You infuse your familiar with additional magical energy. You
can select four familiar or master abilities each day, instead
of two.
Special If your arcane thesis is improved familiar attunement,
your familiar’s base number of familiar abilities, before adding
any extra abilities from the arcane thesis, is four.
4TH LEVEL
BESPELL WEAPON [free-action] FEAT 4
WIZARD
Frequency once per turn
Requirements Your most recent action was to cast a
non-cantrip spell.
You siphon spell energy into one weapon you’re wielding. Until
the end of your turn, the weapon deals an extra 1d6 damage
of a type depending on the school of the spell you just cast.
• Abjuration force damage
• Conjuration or Transmutation the same type as the weapon
• Divination, Enchantment, or Illusion mental damage
• Evocation a type the spell dealt, or force damage if the
spell didn’t deal damage
• Necromancy negative damage
LINKED FOCUS FEAT 4
WIZARD
Prerequisites arcane bond, arcane school
Frequency once per day
You have linked your bonded item to the well of energy that
powers your school spells. When you Drain your Bonded Item to
cast a spell of your arcane school, you also regain 1 Focus Point.
SILENT SPELL [one-action] FEAT 4
CONCENTRATE METAMAGIC WIZARD
Prerequisites Conceal Spell
You’ve learned how to cast many of your spells without
speaking the words of power you would normally need to
provide. If the next action you use is Casting a Spell that has
a verbal component and at least one other component, you can
remove the verbal component. This makes the spell quieter and
allows you to cast it in areas where sound can’t carry. However,
the spell still has visual manifestations, so this doesn’t make
the spell any less obvious to someone who sees you casting it.
When you use Silent Spell, you can choose to gain the benefits
of Conceal Spell, and you don’t need to attempt a Deception
check because the spell has no verbal components.
6TH LEVEL
SPELL PENETRATION FEAT 6
WIZARD
You’ve studied ways of overcoming the innate magical
resistance that dragons, otherworldly beings, and certain
KEY TERM
You’ll see the following key term in many wizard abilities.
Metamagic: Actions with the metamagic trait tweak
the properties of your spells. These actions usually come
from metamagic feats. You must use a metamagic action
directly before Casting the Spell you want to alter. If you
use any action (including free actions and reactions) other
than Cast a Spell directly after, you waste the benefits of
the metamagic action. Any additional effects added by a
metamagic action are part of the spell’s effect, not of the
metamagic action itself.
REACH SPELL [one-action] FEAT 1
CONCENTRATE METAMAGIC WIZARD
You can extend the range of your spells. If the next action you
use is to Cast a Spell that has a range, increase that spell’s range
by 30 feet. As is standard for increasing spell ranges, if the spell
normally has a range of touch, you extend its range to 30 feet.
WIDEN SPELL [one-action] FEAT 1
MANIPULATE METAMAGIC WIZARD
You manipulate the energy of your spell, causing it to affect a
wider area. If the next action you use is to Cast a Spell that has
an area of a burst, cone, or line and does not have a duration,
increase the area of that spell. Add 5 feet to the radius of a
burst that normally has a radius of at least 10 feet (a burst
with a smaller radius is not affected). Add 5 feet to the length
of a cone or line that is normally 15 feet long or smaller, and
add 10 feet to the length of a larger cone or line.
2ND LEVEL
CANTRIP EXPANSION FEAT 2
WIZARD
Dedicated study allows you to prepare a wider range of simple
spells. You can prepare two additional cantrips each day.
CONCEAL SPELL [one-action] FEAT 2
CONCENTRATE MANIPULATE METAMAGIC WIZARD
Hiding your gestures and incantations within other speech
and movement, you attempt to conceal the fact that you are
Casting a Spell. If the next action you use is to Cast a Spell,
attempt a Stealth check against one or more observers’
Perception DCs; if the spell has verbal components, you
must also attempt a Deception check against the observers’
Perception DC. If you succeed at your check (or checks)
against an observer’s DC, that observer doesn’t notice you’re
casting a spell, even though material, somatic, and verbal
components are usually noticeable and spells normally have
sensory manifestations that would make spellcasting obvious
to those nearby.
This ability hides only the spell’s spellcasting actions and
manifestations, not its effects, so an observer might still see a
ray streak out from you or see you vanish into thin air.
Core Rulebook
210
other powerful creatures have. Any creature that has a status bonus to saving throws
against magic reduces that bonus by 1 against your spells.
STEADY SPELLCASTING FEAT 6
WIZARD
Confident in your technique, you don’t easily lose your concentration when you Cast a
Spell. If a reaction would disrupt your spellcasting action, attempt a DC 15 flat check. If you
succeed, your action isn’t disrupted.
8TH LEVEL
ADVANCED SCHOOL SPELL FEAT 8
WIZARD
Prerequisites arcane school
You gain access to a powerful new school spell depending on your arcane school. If you’re an
abjurer, you gain energy absorption; if you’re a conjurer, you gain dimensional steps; if you’re a
diviner, you gain vigilant eye; if you’re an enchanter, you gain dread aura; if you’re an evoker, you
gain elemental tempest; if you’re an illusionist, you gain invisibility cloak; if you’re a necromancer,
you gain life siphon; and if you’re a transmuter, you gain shifting form. The descriptions of these
spells are on pages 406–407. Increase the number of Focus Points in your focus pool by 1.
BOND CONSERVATION [one-action] FEAT 8
MANIPULATE METAMAGIC WIZARD
Prerequisites arcane bond
Requirements The last action you used was Drain Bonded Item.
By carefully manipulating the arcane energies stored in your bonded item as you drain it, you
can conserve just enough power to cast another, slightly weaker spell. If the next action you
use is to Cast a Spell using the energy from Drain Bonded Item, you gain an extra use of Drain
Bonded Item. You must use this extra use of Drain Bonded Item before the end of your next
turn or you lose it, and you can use this additional use only to cast a spell 2 or more levels
lower than the first spell cast with Drain Bonded Item.
UNIVERSAL VERSATILITY FEAT 8
WIZARD
Prerequisites universalist wizard, Hand of the Apprentice
You can access the fundamental abilities of any school of magic. During your daily
preparations, choose one of the eight school spells gained by 1st-level specialist wizards.
You can use that school spell until your next daily preparations. When you Refocus, you can
choose a different school spell from among those eight school spells, replacing the previous
one. Increase the number of Focus Points in your focus pool by 1.
10TH LEVEL
OVERWHELMING ENERGY [one-action] FEAT 10
MANIPULATE METAMAGIC WIZARD
With a complex gesture, you alter the energy of your spell to overcome resistances. If the
next action you use is to Cast a Spell, the spell ignores an amount of the target’s resistance
to acid, cold, electricity, fire, or sonic damage equal to your level. This applies to all damage
the spell deals, including persistent damage and damage caused by an ongoing effect of the
spell, such as the wall created by wall of fire. A creature’s immunities are unaffected.
QUICKENED CASTING [free-action] FEAT 10
CONCENTRATE METAMAGIC WIZARD
Frequency once per day
In a mentally strenuous process, you modify your casting of a spell to take less time. If
your next action is to cast a wizard cantrip or a wizard spell that is at least 2 levels lower
WIZARD FEATS
If you need to look up a wizard
feat by name instead of by level,
use this table.
Feat Level
Advanced School Spell 8
Archwizard’s Might 20
Bespell Weapon 4
Bond Conservation 8
Bonded Focus 14
Cantrip Expansion 2
Clever Counterspell 12
Conceal Spell 2
Counterspell 1
Effortless Concentration 16
Enhanced Familiar 2
Eschew Materials 1
Familiar 1
Hand of the Apprentice 1
Infinite Possibilities 18
Linked Focus 4
Magic Sense 12
Metamagic Mastery 20
Overwhelming Energy 10
Quickened Casting 10
Reach Spell 1
Reflect Spell 14
Reprepare Spell 18
Scroll Savant 10
Silent Spell 4
Spell Combination 20
Spell Penetration 6
Spell Tinker 16
Steady Spellcasting 6
Superior Bond 14
Universal Versatility 8
Widen Spell 1
211
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SAMPLE WIZARD than the highest-level wizard spell you can cast, reduce the
number of actions to cast it by 1 (minimum 1 action).
SCROLL SAVANT FEAT 10
WIZARD
Prerequisites expert in Crafting
During your daily preparations, you can create two temporary
scrolls containing arcane spells from your spellbook. These
scrolls follow the normal rules for scrolls (page 564), with some
additional restrictions. Each scroll must be of a different spell
level, and both spell levels must be 2 or more levels lower than
your highest-level spell. Any scrolls you create this way become
non-magical the next time you make your daily preparations. A
temporary scroll has no value.
If you have master proficiency in arcane spell DCs, you can
create three temporary scrolls during your daily preparations,
and if you have legendary proficiency, you can create four
temporary scrolls.
12TH LEVEL
CLEVER COUNTERSPELL FEAT 12
WIZARD
Prerequisites Counterspell, Quick Recognize
You creatively apply your prepared spells to Counterspell a
much wider variety of your opponents’ magic. Instead of being
able to counter a foe’s spell with Counterspell only if you have
that same spell prepared, you can use Counterspell as long as
you have the spell the foe is casting in your spellbook. When
you use Counterspell in this way, the prepared spell you expend
must share a trait other than its tradition with the triggering
spell. At the GM’s discretion, you can instead use a spell that
has an opposing trait or that otherwise logically would counter
the triggering spell (such as using a cold or water spell to
counter fireball or using remove fear to counter a fear spell).
Regardless of what spell you expend, you take a –2 penalty to
your counteract check, though the GM can waive this penalty if
the expended spell is especially appropriate.
MAGIC SENSE FEAT 12
ARCANE DETECTION DIVINATION WIZARD
You have a literal sixth sense for ambient magic in your vicinity.
You can sense the presence of magic auras as though you were
always using a 1st-level detect magic spell. This detects magic in
your field of vision only. When you Seek, you gain the benefits
of a 3rd-level detect magic spell on things you see (in addition
to the normal benefits of Seeking). You can turn this sense off
and on with a free action at the start or the end of your turn.
14TH LEVEL
BONDED FOCUS FEAT 14
WIZARD
Prerequisites arcane bond
Your connection to your bonded item increases your focus pool.
If you have spent at least 2 Focus Points since the last time
ILLUSIONIST
You cast illusory spells that fool the senses, and you
excel at bypassing threats without violence.
ABILITY SCORES
Prioritize Intelligence. Increase Dexterity and Charisma
so you can sneak and deceive people with skills as well
as spells.
SKILLS
Arcana, Deception, Diplomacy, Occultism, Society,
Stealth, Thievery
SPECIALIZATION
Illusion
THESIS
Spell blending
HIGHER-LEVEL FEATS
Conceal Spell (2nd), Silent Spell (4th), Advanced School
Spell (8th), Magic Sense (12th)
Core Rulebook
212
you Refocused and your bonded item is in your possession, you
recover 2 Focus Points when you Refocus instead of 1.
REFLECT SPELL FEAT 14
WIZARD
Prerequisites Counterspell
When you successfully use Counterspell to counteract a spell
that affects targeted creatures or an area, you can turn that spell’s
effect back on its caster. When reflected, the spell affects only
the original caster, even if it’s an area spell or it would normally
affect more than one creature. The original caster can attempt a
save and use other defenses against the reflected spell as normal.
SUPERIOR BOND FEAT 14
WIZARD
Prerequisites arcane bond
When you draw upon your bonded item, you can leave a bit of
energy within it for later use. You can use Drain Bonded Item
one additional time per day, but only to cast a spell 2 or more
levels lower than your highest-level spell.
16TH LEVEL
EFFORTLESS CONCENTRATION [free-action] FEAT 16
WIZARD
Trigger Your turn begins.
You maintain a spell with hardly a thought. You immediately
gain the effects of the Sustain a Spell action, allowing you to
extend the duration of one of your active wizard spells.
SPELL TINKER [two-actions] FEAT 16
CONCENTRATE WIZARD
You’ve learned to alter choices you make when casting spells
on yourself. After casting a spell on only yourself that offers
several choices of effect (such as resist energy, spell immunity,
or a polymorph spell that offers several potential forms), you
can alter the choice you made when Casting the Spell (for
instance, choosing a different type of damage for resist energy).
However, your tinkering weakens the spell’s integrity, reducing
its remaining duration by half.
You can’t use this feat if the benefits of the spell have already
been used up or if the effects of the first choice would persist in
any way after switching (for instance, if one of the choices was
to create a consumable item you already used, or to heal you),
or if the feat would create an effect more powerful than that
offered by the base spell. The GM is the final arbiter of what
Spell Tinker can be applied to.
18TH LEVEL
INFINITE POSSIBILITIES FEAT 18
WIZARD
You’ve found a way to prepare a spell slot that exists in your
mind as many different possibilities at once. Once during your
daily preparations, you can use a spell slot to hold that infinite
potential, rather than using it to prepare a spell. You can use this
spell slot to cast any spell from your spellbook that’s at least
2 levels lower than the slot you designate; the spell acts in all
ways as a spell of 2 levels lower. You don’t have any particular
spell prepared in that slot until you cast it.
REPREPARE SPELL FEAT 18
WIZARD
You’ve discovered how to reuse some of your spell slots over
and over. You can spend 10 minutes to prepare a spell that
you already cast today, regaining access to that spell slot. The
spell must be of 4th level or lower and one that does not have
a duration. You can reprepare a spell in this way even if you’ve
already reprepared that spell previously in the same day.
If you have the spell substitution arcane thesis, you can
instead prepare a different spell in an expended slot, as long as
the new spell doesn’t have a duration. Once you’ve reprepared
a spell in that slot even once, you can use your arcane thesis
to substitute only spells without durations into that spell slot.
20TH LEVEL
ARCHWIZARD’S MIGHT FEAT 20
WIZARD
Prerequisites archwizard’s spellcraft
You have mastered the greatest secrets of arcane magic. You
gain an additional 10th-level spell slot.
METAMAGIC MASTERY FEAT 20
WIZARD
Altering your spells doesn’t take any longer than casting them
normally. You can use metamagic single actions as free actions.
SPELL COMBINATION FEAT 20
WIZARD
You can merge spells, producing multiple effects with a single
casting. One slot of each level of spell you can cast, except
2nd level and 1st level, becomes a spell combination slot (this
doesn’t apply to cantrips). When you prepare your spells, you
can fill a combination slot with a combination of two spells.
Each spell in the combination must be 2 or more spell levels
below the slot’s level, and both must target only one creature or
object or have the option to target only one creature or object.
Each spell in the combination must also have the same means of
determining whether it has an effect—both spells must require a
ranged spell attack roll, require the same type of saving throw,
or automatically affect the target.
When you cast a combined spell, it affects only one target,
even if the component spells normally affect more than one. If
any spell in the combination has further restrictions (such as
targeting only living creatures), you must abide by all restrictions.
The combined spell uses the shorter of the component spells’
ranges. Resolve a combined spell as if were a single spell, but
apply the effects of both component spells. For example, if the
spell’s target succeeded at the save against a combined spell, it
would apply the success effect of each spell, and if it critically
failed, it would apply the critical failure effect of both spells.
213
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Animal Companions
An animal companion is a loyal comrade who follows
your orders without you needing to use Handle an Animal
on it. Your animal companion has the minion trait, and it
gains 2 actions during your turn if you use the Command
an Animal action to command it; this is in place of the
usual effects of Command an Animal. If your companion
dies, you can spend a week of downtime to replace it at no
cost. You can have only one animal companion at a time.
Riding Animal Companions
You or an ally can ride your animal companion as long as
it is at least one size larger than the rider. If it is carrying a
rider, the animal companion can use only its land Speed, and
it can’t move and Support you on the same turn. However, if
your companion has the mount special ability, it’s especially
suited for riding and ignores both of these restrictions.
Young Animal Companions
The following are the base statistics for a young animal
companion, the first animal companion most characters
get. You make adjustments to these statistics depending
on the type of animal you choose. As you gain levels,
you might make further adjustments as your companion
becomes more powerful. Animal companions calculate
their modifiers and DCs just as you do with one difference:
the only item bonuses they can benefit from are to speed
and AC (their maximum item bonus to AC is +2).
Proficiencies
Your animal companion uses your level to determine its
proficiency bonuses. It’s trained in its unarmed attacks,
unarmored defense, barding, all saving throws, Perception,
Acrobatics, and Athletics. Animal companions can’t use
abilities that require greater Intelligence, such as Coerce
or Decipher Writing, even if trained in the appropriate
skill, unless they have a specialization that allows it.
Ability Modifiers
An animal companion begins with base ability modifiers
of Str +2, Dex +2, Con +1, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha +0. Each
type has its own strengths and increases two of these
modifiers by 1 each. These increases are already calculated
into the stat blocks in Companion Types below.
Hit Points
Your animal companion has ancestry Hit Points from
its type, plus a number of Hit Points equal to 6 plus its
Constitution modifier for each level you have.
Mature Animal Companions
To advance a young animal companion to a mature animal
companion (usually a result of one of your class feat
choices), increase its Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, and
Wisdom modifiers by 1. Increase its unarmed attack damage
from one die to two dice (for instance 1d8 to 2d8), and its
proficiency rank for Perception and all saving throws to
expert. Increase its proficiency ranks in Intimidation, Stealth,
and Survival to trained, and if it was already trained in one
of those skills from its type, increase its proficiency rank in
that skill to expert. If your companion is Medium or smaller,
it grows by one size.
Nimble Animal Companions
To advance a mature animal companion to a nimble
animal companion, increase its Dexterity modifier by 2
and its Strength, Constitution, and Wisdom modifiers
by 1. It deals 2 additional damage with its unarmed
attacks. Increase its proficiency ranks in Acrobatics and
unarmored defense to expert. It also learns the advanced
maneuver for its type. Its attacks become magical for the
purpose of ignoring resistances.
Savage Animal Companions
To advance a mature animal companion to a savage animal
companion, increase its Strength modifier by 2 and its
Dexterity, Constitution, and Wisdom modifiers by 1. It deals
3 additional damage with its unarmed attacks. Increase
its proficiency rank in Athletics to expert. It also learns
the advanced maneuver for its type. If your companion is
Medium or smaller, it grows by one size. Its attacks become
magical for the purpose of ignoring resistances.
Companion Types
The species of animal you choose is called your companion’s
type. Each companion type has its own statistics. The
Size entry indicates your companion’s starting size as a
young animal companion. Following the size entry are
the companion’s unarmed attacks, and then its ability
modifiers. The Hit Points entry indicates the companion’s
ancestry Hit Points. The Skill entry indicates an additional
trained skill your companion has. The Senses entry lists
your companion’s special senses. The Speed entry gives
your companion’s Speeds. The Special entry, if present, lists
any other special abilities your companion has, for example
whether it often serves as a mount and is particularly
appropriate for mounted classes, such as the champion.
The Support Benefit entry indicates a special benefit you
gain by Commanding the Animal to use the Support action
Animal Companions and Familiars
Some adventurers travel with loyal allies known as animal companions and familiars. The
former begin as young animals but acquire impressive physical abilities as you level up, while
the latter share a magical bond with you.
Core Rulebook
214
(see below). The Advanced Maneuver entry indicates a
powerful new action your companion learns how to use if
it becomes a nimble or savage animal companion.
SUPPORT [one-action]
Requirements The creature is an animal companion.
Your animal companion supports you. You gain the benefits
listed in the companion type’s Support Benefit entry. If the
animal uses the Support action, the only other actions it can
use on this turn are basic move actions to get into position to
take advantage of the Support benefits; if it has already used
any other action this turn, it can’t Support you.
Badger
Your companion is a badger, wolverine, or other big mustelid.
Size Small
Melee [one-action] jaws, Damage 1d8 piercing
Melee [one-action] claw (agile), Damage 1d6 slashing
Str +2, Dex +2, Con +2, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha +0
Hit Points 8
Skill Survival
Senses low-light vision, scent (imprecise, 30 feet)
Speed 25 feet, burrow 10 feet, climb 10 feet
Support Benefit Your badger digs around your foe’s position,
interfering with its footing. Until the start of your next turn, if
you hit and deal damage to a creature your badger threatens,
the target can’t use a Step action (unless it can Step through
difficult terrain) until it moves from its current position.
Advanced Maneuver Badger Rage
BADGER RAGE [one-action]
CONCENTRATE EMOTION MENTAL
Requirements The badger isn’t fatigued or raging.
The badger enters a state of pure rage that lasts for 1 minute, until
there are no enemies it can perceive, or until it falls unconscious,
whichever comes first. It can’t voluntarily stop raging. While
raging, the badger is affected in the following ways.
• It deals 4 additional damage with its bite attacks and 2
additional damage with its claw attacks.
• It takes a –1 penalty to AC.
• It can’t use actions that have the concentrate trait
unless they also have the rage trait. The animal
companion can Seek even while raging.
After it has stopped raging, it can’t use Badger Rage again
for 1 minute.
Bear
Your companion is a black, grizzly, polar, or other type of bear.
Size Small
Melee [one-action] jaws, Damage 1d8 piercing
Melee [one-action] claw (agile), Damage 1d6 slashing
Str +3, Dex +2, Con +2, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha +0
Hit Points 8
Skill Intimidation
Senses low-light vision, scent (imprecise, 30 feet)
Speed 35 feet
Support Benefit Your bear mauls your enemies when you create
an opening. Until the start of your next turn, each time you
hit a creature in the bear’s reach with a Strike, the creature
takes 1d8 slashing damage from the bear. If your bear is
nimble or savage, the slashing damage increases to 2d8.
Advanced Maneuver Bear Hug
BEAR HUG [one-action]
Requirements The bear’s last action was a successful claw Strike.
The bear makes another claw Strike against the same target.
If this Strike hits, the target is also grabbed, as if the bear had
successfully Grappled the target.
Bird
Your companion is a bird of prey, such as an eagle, hawk, or owl.
Size Small
Melee [one-action] jaws (finesse), Damage 1d6 piercing
Melee [one-action] talon (agile, finesse), Damage 1d4 slashing
Str +2, Dex +3, Con +1, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha +0
Hit Points 4
Skill Stealth
Senses low-light vision
Speed 10 feet, fly 60 feet
Support Benefit The bird pecks at your foes’ eyes when you
create an opening. Until the start of your next turn, your
Strikes that damage a creature that your bird threatens also
deal 1d4 persistent bleed damage, and the target is dazzled
until it removes the bleed damage. If your bird is nimble or
savage, the persistent bleed damage increases to 2d4.
Advanced Maneuver Flyby Attack
FLYBY ATTACK [two-actions]
The bird Flies and makes a talon Strike at any point along the way.
Cat
Your companion is a big cat, such as a leopard or tiger.
Size Small
Melee [one-action] jaws (finesse), Damage 1d6 piercing
Melee [one-action] claw (agile, finesse), Damage 1d4 slashing
Str +2, Dex +3, Con +1, Int –4, Wis +2, Cha +0
Hit Points 4
Skill Stealth
Senses low-light vision, scent (imprecise, 30 feet)
Speed 35 feet
Special Your cat deals 1d4 extra precision damage against flatfooted targets.
Support Benefit Your cat throws your enemies off-balance when
you create an opening. Until the start of your next turn, your
Strikes that deal damage to a creature that your cat threatens
make the target flat-footed until the end of your next turn.
Advanced Maneuver Cat Pounce
CAT POUNCE [one-action]
FLOURISH
The cat Strides and then Strikes. If it was undetected at the start
of its Cat Pounce, it remains undetected until after the attack.
215
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Dromaeosaur
Your companion is a dromaeosaur (also called a raptor), such
as a velociraptor or deinonychus.
Size Small
Melee [one-action] jaws (finesse); Damage 1d8 piercing
Melee [one-action] talon (agile, finesse); Damage 1d6 slashing
Str +2, Dex +3, Con +2, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha +0
Hit Points 6
Skill Stealth
Senses low-light vision, scent (imprecise, 30 feet)
Speed 50 feet
Support Benefit Your raptor constantly darts into flanking
position. Until the start of your next turn, it counts as being in
its space or an empty space of your choice within 10 feet when
determining whether you and your companion are flanking;
you can choose a different space for each of your attacks).
Advanced Maneuver Darting Attack
DARTING ATTACK [one-action]
FLOURISH
The raptor Steps up to 10 feet and then Strikes, or Strikes and
then Steps up to 10 feet.
Horse
Your companion is a horse, pony, or similar equine.
Size Medium or Large
Melee [one-action] hoof (agile), Damage 1d6 bludgeoning
Str +3, Dex +2, Con +2, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha +0
Hit Points 8
Skill Survival
Senses low-light vision, scent (imprecise, 30 feet)
Speed 40 feet
Special mount
Support Benefit Your horse adds momentum to your charge.
Until the start of your next turn, if you moved at least 10
feet on the action before your attack, add a circumstance
bonus to damage to that attack equal to twice the number of
damage dice. If your weapon already has the jousting weapon
trait, increase the trait’s damage bonus by 2 per die instead.
Advanced Maneuver Gallop
GALLOP [two-actions]
MOVE
The horse Strides twice at a +10-foot circumstance bonus to Speed.
Snake
Your companion is a constrictor snake, such as a boa or python.
Size Small
Melee [one-action] jaws (finesse); Damage 1d8 piercing
Str +3, Dex +3, Con +1, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha +0
Hit Points 6
Skill Stealth
Senses low-light vision, scent (imprecise, 30 feet)
Speed 20 feet, climb 20 feet, swim 20 feet
Support Benefit Your snake holds your enemies with its coils,
interfering with reactions. Until the start of your next turn,
any creature your snake threatens can’t use reactions
triggered by your actions unless its level is higher than yours.
Advanced Maneuver Constrict
CONSTRICT [one-action]
Requirements The snake has a smaller creature grabbed.
The snake deals 12 bludgeoning damage to the grabbed creature;
the creature must attempt a basic Fortitude save. If the snake is a
specialized animal companion, increase this damage to 20.
Wolf
Your companion is a wolf or other canine creature, such as a dog.
Size Small
[one-action] Melee jaws (finesse); Damage 1d8 piercing
Str +2, Dex +3, Con +2, Int –4, Wis +1, Cha +0
Hit Points 6
Skill Survival
Senses low-light vision, scent (imprecise, 30 feet)
Speed 40 feet
Support Benefit Your wolf tears tendons with each opening.
Until the start of your next turn, your Strikes that damage
creatures your wolf threatens give the target a –5-foot status
penalty to its Speeds for 1 minute (–10 on a critical success).
Core Rulebook
216
Advanced Maneuver Knockdown
KNOCKDOWN [one-action]
Requirements The animal companion’s last action was a
successful jaws Strike.
The wolf automatically knocks the target of its jaws Strike prone.
Specialized Animal Companions
Specialized animal companions are more intelligent and
engage in more complex behaviors. The first time an animal
gains a specialization, it gains the following: Its proficiency
rank for unarmed attacks increases to expert. Its proficiency
ranks for saving throws and Perception increase to master.
Increase its Dexterity modifier by 1 and its Intelligence
modifier by 2. Its unarmed attack damage increases from
two dice to three dice, and it increases its additional damage
with unarmed attacks from 2 to 4 or from 3 to 6.
Each specialization grants additional benefits. Most
animal companions can have only one specialization.
Ambusher
In your companion’s natural environment, it can use
a Sneak action even if it’s currently observed. It gains a
+2 circumstance bonus to initiative rolls using Stealth, its
proficiency rank in Stealth increases to expert (or master if
it was already an expert from its type), and its Dexterity
modifier increases by 1. Its proficiency rank for unarmored
defense increases to expert, or master if it’s nimble.
Bully
Your companion terrorizes foes with dominance displays
and pushes them around the battlefield. Its proficiency ranks
for Athletics and Intimidation increase to expert (or master
if it was already expert from its type), its Strength modifier
increases by 1, and its Charisma modifier increases by 3.
Daredevil
Your companion joins the fray with graceful leaps and dives.
It gains the deny advantage ability, so it isn’t flat-footed
to hidden, undetected, or flanking creatures unless such a
creature’s level is greater than yours. Its proficiency rank in
Acrobatics increases to master, and its Dexterity modifier
increases by 1. Its proficiency rank in unarmored defense
increases to expert, or master if it’s nimble.
Racer
Your companion races. It gains a +10-foot status bonus
to its Speed, swim Speed, or fly Speed (your choice). Its
proficiency in Fortitude saves increases to legendary, and
its Constitution modifier increases by 1.
Tracker
Your companion is an incredible tracker. It can move at full
Speed while following tracks. Its proficiency rank in Survival
increases to expert (or master if it was already an expert
from its type), and its Wisdom modifier increases by 1.
Wrecker
Your companion smashes things. Its unarmed attacks
ignore half an object’s Hardness. Its Athletics proficiency
increases to master, and its Strength modifier increases
by 1.
Familiars
Familiars are mystically bonded creatures tied to your
magic. Most familiars were originally animals, though
the ritual of becoming a familiar makes them something
more. You can choose a Tiny animal you want as your
familiar, such as a bat, cat, raven, or snake. Some familiars
are different, usually described in the ability that granted
you a familiar; for example, a druid’s leshy familiar is a
Tiny plant instead of an animal, formed from a minor
nature spirit.
Familiars have the minion trait (page 634), so during
an encounter, they gain 2 actions in a round if you spend
an action to command them. If your familiar dies, you
can spend a week of downtime to replace it at no cost.
You can have only one familiar at a time.
Modifiers and AC
Your familiar’s save modifiers and AC are equal to
yours before applying circumstance or status bonuses or
penalties. Its Perception, Acrobatics, and Stealth modifiers
are equal to your level plus your spellcasting ability
modifier (Charisma if you don’t have one, unless otherwise
specified). If it attempts an attack roll or other skill check, it
uses your level as its modifier. It doesn’t have or use its own
ability modifiers and can never benefit from item bonuses.
Hit Points
Your familiar has 5 Hit Points for each of your levels.
217
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Size
Your familiar is Tiny.
Senses
Your familiar has low-light vision and can gain additional
senses from familiar abilities. It can communicate
empathically with you as long as it’s within 1 mile of you,
sharing emotions. It doesn’t understand or speak languages
normally, but it can gain speech from a familiar ability.
Movement
Your familiar has either a Speed of 25 feet or a swim
Speed of 25 feet (choose one upon gaining the familiar).
It can gain other movement types from familiar abilities.
Familiar and Master Abilities
Each day, you channel your magic into two abilities,
which can be either familiar or master abilities. If your
familiar is an animal that naturally has one of these
abilities (for instance, an owl has a fly Speed), you must
select that ability. Your familiar can’t be an animal that
naturally has more familiar abilities than your daily
maximum familiar abilities.
Familiar Abilities
Amphibious: It gains a swim Speed of 25 feet (or Speed of
25 feet if it already has a swim Speed).
Burrower: It gains a burrow Speed of 5 feet, allowing it
to dig Tiny holes.
Climber: It gains a climb Speed of 25 feet.
Damage Avoidance: Choose one type of save. It takes
no damage when it succeeds at that type of save; this
doesn’t prevent effects other than damage.
Darkvision: It gains darkvision.
Fast Movement: Increase one of the familiar’s Speeds
from 25 feet to 40 feet.
Flier: It gains a fly Speed of 25 feet.
Kinspeech: It can understand and speak with animals
of the same species. To select this, your familiar must be
an animal, it must have the speech ability, and you must
be at least 6th level.
Lab Assistant: It can use your Quick Alchemy action.
You must have Quick Alchemy, and your familiar must
be in your space. This has the same cost and requirement
as if you used it. It must have the manual dexterity
ability to select this.
Manual Dexterity: It can use up to two of its limbs as
if they were hands to use manipulate actions.
Scent: It gains scent (imprecise, 30 feet).
Speech: It understands and speaks a language
you know.
Master Abilities
Cantrip Connection: You can prepare an additional
cantrip, or if you have a repertoire, instead designate a
cantrip to add to your repertoire every time you select
this ability; you can retrain it but can’t otherwise change
it. You must be able to prepare cantrips or add them to
your repertoire to select this.
Extra Reagents: Your familiar grows extra infused
reagents on or in its body. You gain an additional batch
of infused reagents. You must have the infused reagents
ability to select this ability.
Familiar Focus: Once per day, your familiar can use 2
actions with the concentrate trait to regain 1 Focus Point,
up to your usual maximum You must have a focus pool
to select this.
Lifelink: If your familiar would be reduced to 0 HP by
damage, as a reaction with the concentrate trait, you can
take the damage. If you do, you take all the damage and
your familiar takes none. However, if special effects when
a hit damages your familiar (such as snake venom) still
apply to your familiar.
Spell Battery: You gain one additional spell slot at least
3 levels lower than your highest-level spell slot; you
must be able to cast 4th-level spells using spell slots to
select this master ability.
Spell Delivery: If your familiar is in your space,
you can cast a spell with a range of touch, transfer
its power to your familiar, and command the
familiar to deliver the spell. If you do, the familiar
uses its 2 actions for the round to move to a target
of your choice and touch that target. If it doesn’t
reach the target to touch it this turn, the spell has
no effect.
Core Rulebook
218
Applying an archetype requires you to select archetype feats
instead of class feats. Start by finding the archetype that
best fits your character concept, and select the archetype’s
dedication feat using one of your class feat choices. Once
you have the dedication feat, you can select any feat from
that archetype in place of a class feat as long as you meet its
prerequisites. The archetype feat you select is still subject
to any selection restrictions on the class feat it replaces. For
example, if you gained an ability at 6th level that granted
you a 4th-level class feat with the dwarf trait, you could
swap out that class feat only for an archetype feat of 4th
level or lower with the dwarf trait. Archetype feats you
gain in place of a class feat are called archetype class feats.
Occasionally, an archetype feat works like a skill
feat instead of a class feat. These archetype feats have
the skill trait, and you select them in place of a skill
feat, otherwise following the same rules above. These
are not archetype class feats (for instance, to determine
the number of Hit Points you gain from the Fighter
Resiliency archetype feat).
Each archetype’s dedication feat represents a certain
portion of your character’s time and focus, so once you
select a dedication feat for an archetype, you must satisfy
its requirements before you can gain another dedication
feat. Typically, you satisfy an archetype dedication feat
by gaining a certain number of feats from the archetype’s
list. You cannot retrain a dedication feat as long as you
have any other feats from that archetype.
Sometimes an archetype feat lets you gain another feat,
such as the alchemist’s basic concoction. You must always
meet the prerequisites of the feat you gain in this way.
Two special kinds of archetypes are designated by the
class and multiclass traits. The archetypes in this book
are all multiclass archetypes.
Multiclass Archetypes
Archetypes with the multiclass trait represent diversifying
your training into another class’s specialties. You can’t
select a multiclass archetype’s dedication feat if you are
a member of the class of the same name (for instance, a
fighter can’t select the Fighter Dedication feat).
Class Archetypes
Archetypes with the class trait represent a fundamental
divergence from your class’s specialties, but one that exists
within the context of your class. You can select a class
archetype only if you are a member of the class of the same
name. Class archetypes always alter or replace some of a
class’s static class features, in addition to any new feats they
offer. It may be possible to take a class archetype at 1st level
if it alters or replaces some of the class’s initial class features.
In that case, you must take that archetype’s dedication feat
at 2nd level, and after that you proceed normally. You can
never have more than one class archetype.
Spellcasting Archetypes
Some archetypes grant you a substantial degree of
spellcasting, albeit delayed compared to a character
from a spellcasting class. In this book, the spellcasting
archetypes are bard, cleric, druid, sorcerer, and
wizard, the multiclass archetypes for the five main
spellcasting classes, but future books might introduce
spellcasting archetypes that aren’t multiclass archetypes.
A spellcasting archetype allows you to use scrolls,
staves, and wands in the same way that a member of a
spellcasting class can.
Spellcasting archetypes always grant the ability to
cast cantrips in their dedication, and then they have a
basic spellcasting feat, an expert spellcasting feat, and
a master spellcasting feat. These feats share their name
with the archetype; for instance, the wizard’s master
spellcasting feat is called Master Wizard Spellcasting.
All spell slots you gain from spellcasting archetypes
have restrictions depending on the archetype; for
instance, the bard archetype grants you spell slots
you can use only to cast occult spells from your bard
repertoire, even if you are a sorcerer with occult spells
in your sorcerer repertoire.
Basic Spellcasting Feat: Available at 4th level, these feats
grant a 1st-level spell slot. At 6th level, they grant you a
2nd-level spell slot. At 8th level, they grant you a 3rdlevel spell slot. Archetypes refer to these benefits as the
“basic spellcasting benefits.”
Expert Spellcasting Feat: Taken at 12th level, these feats
make you an expert in spell attack rolls and DCs of the
appropriate magical tradition and grant you a 4th-level
spell slot. At 14th level, they grant you a 5th-level spell
slot, and at 16th level, they grant you a 6th-level spell
slot. Archetypes refer to these benefits as the “expert
spellcasting benefits.”
Master Spellcasting Feat: Upon reaching 18th level,
these feats make you a master in spell attack rolls and
DCs of the appropriate magical tradition and grant you
a 7th-level spell slot. At 20th level, they grant you an 8thlevel spell slot. Archetypes refer to these benefits as the
“master spellcasting benefits.”
Archetypes
There are infinite possible character concepts, but you might find that the feats and skill
choices from a single class aren’t sufficient to fully realize your character. Archetypes allow
you to expand the scope of your character’s class.
219
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Alchemist
You enjoy tinkering with alchemical formulas and
substances in your spare time, and your studies have
progressed beyond mere experimentation.
Multiclass alchemist characters
The free alchemical items from the alchemist archetype
are extremely useful to characters of any class. The
following are just some of the possible combinations.
• Barbarian alchemists can mix mutagens with
their rage to ferocious effect.
• Champion alchemists can focus on alchemical
items that boost defenses and heal others,
allowing their champion’s reaction
and lay on hands to go further.
• Fighter alchemists can use their
alchemy to gain additional options
in situations where their usual
tactics don’t work.
• Ranger alchemists focus on alchemy
and snares, getting extra use out of
their Crafting skill and supplying
bombs for the bomb snare.
• Rogue alchemists can combine a rogue’s poison
feats with free daily poisons, and bombs present an
interesting way to sneak attack with various types
of energy damage.
• Spellcaster alchemists often use their alchemical
items to take pressure off their repertoire or prepared
spells. For instance, a wizard alchemist who can
brew up darksight elixirs to grant darkvision can
prepare another spell instead of darkvision.
ALCHEMIST DEDICATION FEAT 2
ARCHETYPE DEDICATION MULTICLASS
Prerequisites Intelligence 14
You put your alchemical interest into practice. You become
trained in alchemical bombs and Crafting; if you were already
trained in Crafting, you instead become trained in a skill of
your choice. You become trained in alchemist class DC.
You gain the alchemist’s infused reagents class feature,
gaining a number of reagents each day equal to your level.
You also gain the Alchemical Crafting feat and four additional
formulas for 1st-level alchemical items, as well as the ability
to create free items during your daily preparations. Your
advanced alchemy level is 1 and doesn’t increase on its own.
Special You cannot select another dedication feat until you
have gained two other feats from the alchemist archetype.
BASIC CONCOCTION FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Alchemist Dedication
You gain a 1st- or 2nd-level alchemist feat.
QUICK ALCHEMY FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Alchemist Dedication
You gain the Quick Alchemy action (page 72).
ADVANCED CONCOCTION FEAT 6
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Basic Concoction
You gain one alchemist feat. For the purpose of meeting
its prerequisites, your alchemist level is equal to half your
character level.
Special You can select this feat more than once. Each time
you select it, you gain another alchemist feat.
EXPERT ALCHEMY FEAT 6
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Alchemist Dedication, expert in Crafting
Your advanced alchemy level increases to 3. At 10th level, it
increases to 5.
MASTER ALCHEMY FEAT 12
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Expert Alchemy, master in Crafting
Your advanced alchemy level increases to 7. For every level you
gain beyond 12th, your advanced alchemy level increases by 1.
Core Rulebook
220
Barbarian
There’s a rage deep inside you that sometimes breaks
loose, granting you some of the might of a barbarian in
addition to your other abilities.
Multiclass Barbarian characters
The barbarian archetype is a great choice for characters
that emphasize Strength and melee attacks more than
usual for their class, as long as they can handle Rage’s
spellcasting restriction. It’s especially good for characters
looking to add more damage.
BARBARIAN DEDICATION FEAT 2
ARCHETYPE DEDICATION MULTICLASS
Prerequisites Strength 14, Constitution 14
You become trained in Athletics; if you were already trained in
Athletics, you instead become trained in a skill of your choice.
You become trained in barbarian class DC.
You can use the Rage action (page 84).
Choose an instinct as you would if you were a barbarian. You
have that instinct for all purposes and become bound by its
anathema, but you don’t gain any of the other abilities it grants.
Special You cannot select another dedication feat until you
have gained two other feats from the barbarian archetype.
BARBARIAN RESILIENCY FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Barbarian Dedication, class granting no more
Hit Points per level than 10 + your Constitution modifier
You gain 3 additional Hit Points for each barbarian archetype
class feat you have. As you continue selecting barbarian
archetype class feats, you continue to gain additional Hit
Points in this way.
BASIC FURY FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Barbarian Dedication
You gain a 1st- or 2nd-level barbarian feat.
ADVANCED FURY FEAT 6
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Basic Fury
You gain one barbarian feat. For the purpose of meeting
its prerequisites, your barbarian level is equal to half your
character level.
Special You can select this feat more than once. Each time
you select it, you gain another barbarian feat.
INSTINCT ABILITY FEAT 6
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Barbarian Dedication
You gain the instinct ability for the instinct you chose for
Barbarian Dedication.
JUGGERNAUT’S FORTITUDE FEAT 12
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Barbarian Dedication, expert in Fortitude saves
Your proficiency rank in Fortitude saves increases to master.
221
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Bard
A muse has called you to dabble in occult lore, allowing
you to cast a few spells. The deeper you delve, the more
powerful your performances become.
Multiclass Bard characters
The bard archetype grants powerful effects that tend to
use actions; it’s a great choice if you have actions to spare.
BARD DEDICATION FEAT 2
ARCHETYPE DEDICATION MULTICLASS
Prerequisites Charisma 14
You cast spells like a bard and gain the Cast a Spell activity. You
gain a spell repertoire with two common cantrips from the occult
spell list, or any other cantrips you learn or discover. You’re
trained in spell attack rolls and spell DCs for occult spells. Your
key spellcasting ability for bard archetype spells is Charisma, and
they are occult bard spells. You become trained in Occultism and
Performance; for each of these skills in which you were already
trained, you instead become trained in a skill of your choice.
Choose a muse as you would if you were a bard. You have
that muse for all purposes, allowing you to take that muse’s
feats, but you don’t gain any of the other abilities it grants.
Special You cannot select another dedication feat until you
have gained two other feats from the bard archetype.
BASIC BARD SPELLCASTING FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Bard Dedication
You gain the basic spellcasting benefits (page 219). Each time
you gain a spell slot of a new level from the bard archetype,
add a common occult spell or another spell you learned or
discovered to your repertoire, of the appropriate spell level.
BASIC MUSE’S WHISPERS FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Bard Dedication
You gain a 1st- or 2nd-level bard feat.
ADVANCED MUSE’S WHISPERS FEAT 6
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Basic Muse’s Whispers
You gain one bard feat. For the purpose of meeting
its prerequisites, your bard level is equal to half your
character level.
Special You can select this feat more than once. Each time
you select it, you gain another bard feat.
COUNTER PERFORM FEAT 6
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Bard Dedication
You gain the counter performance composition spell.
If you don’t already have one, you gain a focus
pool of 1 Focus Point, which you can Refocus by
engaging your muse. (For more on composition
spells, see page 97.)
INSPIRATIONAL PERFORMANCE FEAT 8
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Bard Dedication
You gain the inspire courage composition cantrip.
OCCULT BREADTH FEAT 8
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Basic Bard Spellcasting
Your repertoire expands, and you can cast more occult spells
each day. Increase the number of spells in your repertoire and
the number of spell slots you gain from bard archetype feats by
1 for each spell level other than your two highest spell levels.
EXPERT BARD SPELLCASTING FEAT 12
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Basic Bard Spellcasting, master in Occultism
You gain the expert spellcasting benefits (page 219).
MASTER BARD SPELLCASTING FEAT 18
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Expert Bard Spellcasting, legendary in Occultism
You gain the master spellcasting benefits (page 219).
Core Rulebook
222
Champion
You have sworn a solemn oath to your deity, who has
granted you champion powers to aid you in your cause.
Multiclass Champion characters
The champion archetype greatly improves defenses,
particularly armor. It’s a great way for a character to gain
armor proficiency or a powerful defensive reaction.
CHAMPION DEDICATION FEAT 2
ARCHETYPE DEDICATION MULTICLASS
Prerequisites Strength 14, Charisma 14
Choose a deity and cause as you would if you were a
champion. You become trained in light, medium, and
heavy armor. You become trained in Religion and
your deity’s associated skill; for each of these skills
in which you were already trained, you instead
become trained in a skill of your choice. You
become trained in champion class DC.
You are bound by your deity’s anathema and
must follow the champion’s code and alignment
requirements for your cause. You don’t gain any
other abilities from your choice of deity or cause.
Special You cannot select another dedication
feat until you have gained two other feats from the
champion archetype.
BASIC DEVOTION FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Champion Dedication
You gain a 1st- or 2nd-level champion feat.
CHAMPION RESILIENCY FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Champion Dedication,
class granting no more Hit Points per level than 8  +
your Constitution modifier
You gain 3 additional Hit Points for each champion archetype class
feat you have. As you continue selecting champion archetype
class feats, you continue to gain additional Hit Points in this way.
HEALING TOUCH FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Champion Dedication
You gain the appropriate devotion spell for your cause (lay on
hands for the paladin, redeemer, and liberator). If you don’t
already have one, you gain a focus pool of 1 Focus Point,
which you can Refocus by praying or serving your deity. (For
more on devotion spells, see page 107.)
ADVANCED DEVOTION FEAT 6
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Basic Devotion
You gain one champion feat. For the purpose of meeting
its prerequisites, your champion level is equal to half your
character level.
Special You can select this feat more than once. Each time
you select it, you gain another champion feat.
CHAMPION’S REACTION FEAT 6
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Champion Dedication
You can use the champion’s reaction associated with your cause.
DIVINE ALLY FEAT 6
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Champion Dedication
You gain a divine ally of your choice (page 108).
DIVERSE ARMOR EXPERT FEAT 14
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Champion Dedication, expert in
unarmored defense or one or more types of armor
Your proficiency ranks for light armor, medium armor,
heavy armor, and unarmored defense increase to expert.
223
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Cleric
You are an ordained priest of your deity and have even
learned how to cast a few divine spells. Though your main
training lies elsewhere, your religious calling provides
you divine gifts.
Multiclass Cleric characters
The cleric archetype is a great way to create a character
of another class who’s a devotee of a particular deity.
The many domains available to clerics of different deities
present a variety of options for focus spells.
• Alchemist clerics work well with the chirurgeon
field, healing various ailments with either alchemy
or spells.
• Martial clerics are typically looking for a potent
domain spell or some healing to use in a pinch.
• Divine sorcerer clerics double down as the ultimate
divine spellcasters.
• Other spellcaster clerics diversify their options,
becoming theurgic characters who combine two
magical traditions.
CLERIC DEDICATION FEAT 2
ARCHETYPE DEDICATION MULTICLASS
Prerequisites Wisdom 14
You cast spells like a cleric. You gain access to the Cast a Spell
activity. You can prepare two common cantrips each day from
the divine spell list in this book or any other cantrips you learn
or discover. You’re trained in spell attack rolls and spell DCs for
divine spells. Your key spellcasting ability for cleric archetype
spells is Wisdom, and they are divine cleric spells. Choose a
deity as you would if you were a cleric. You become bound
by that deity’s anathema. You become trained in Religion and
your deity’s associated skill; for each of these skills in which
you were already trained, you instead become trained in a skill
of your choice. You don’t gain any other abilities from your
choice of deity.
Special You cannot select another dedication feat until you
have gained two other feats from the cleric archetype.
BASIC CLERIC SPELLCASTING FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Cleric Dedication
You gain the basic spellcasting benefits (page 219). You can
prepare your deity’s spells in your spell slots of the appropriate
level from the cleric archetype.
BASIC DOGMA FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Cleric Dedication
You gain a 1st- or 2nd-level cleric feat.
ADVANCED DOGMA FEAT 6
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Basic Dogma
You gain one cleric feat. For the purpose of meeting
its prerequisites, your cleric level is equal to half your
character  level.
Special You can select this feat more than once. Each time
you select it, you gain another cleric feat.
DIVINE BREADTH FEAT 8
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Basic Cleric Spellcasting
You can cast more divine spells each day. Increase the spell
slots you gain from cleric archetype feats by 1 for each spell
level other than your two highest spell levels.
EXPERT CLERIC SPELLCASTING FEAT 12
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Basic Cleric Spellcasting, master in Religion
You gain the expert spellcasting benefits (page 219).
MASTER CLERIC SPELLCASTING FEAT 18
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Expert Cleric Spellcasting, legendary in
Religion
You gain the master spellcasting benefits (page 219).
Core Rulebook
224
Druid
You have entered a druidic circle and learned a few of the
order’s secrets, granting you primal power.
Multiclass Druid characters
The druid archetype can provide a bit of healing or
elemental damage and can increase your utility in a
natural environment with spells like speak with animals
and meld into stone.
DRUID DEDICATION FEAT 2
ARCHETYPE DEDICATION MULTICLASS
Prerequisites Wisdom 14
You cast spells like a druid. You gain access to the Cast a Spell
activity. You can prepare two common cantrips each day from
the primal spell list in this book or any other cantrips you
learn or discover. You’re trained in spell attack rolls and spell
DCs for primal spells. Your key spellcasting ability for druid
archetype spells is Wisdom, and they are primal druid spells.
You learn the Druidic language.
Choose an order as you would if you were a druid. You
become a member of that order and are bound by its anathema,
allowing you to take the order’s feats. You become trained in
Nature and your order’s associated skill; for each of these
skills in which you were already trained, you become trained
in a skill of your choice. You don’t gain any other abilities from
your choice of order.
Special You cannot select another dedication feat until you
have gained two other feats from the druid archetype.
BASIC DRUID SPELLCASTING FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Druid Dedication
You gain the basic spellcasting benefits (page 219).
BASIC WILDING FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Druid Dedication
You gain a 1st- or 2nd-level druid feat.
ORDER SPELL FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Druid Dedication
You gain the initial order spell from your order. If you don’t
already have one, you gain a focus pool of 1 Focus Point, which
you can Refocus by being one with nature. (For more on order
spells, see page 131.)
ADVANCED WILDING FEAT 6
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Basic Wilding
You gain one druid feat. For the purpose of meeting
its prerequisites, your druid level is equal to half your
character level.
Special You can select this feat more than once. Each time
you select it, you gain another druid feat.
PRIMAL BREADTH FEAT 8
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Basic Druid Spellcasting
Increase the spell slots you gain from druid archetype feats by
1 for each spell level other than your two highest spell levels.
EXPERT DRUID SPELLCASTING FEAT 12
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Basic Druid Spellcasting, master in Nature
You gain the expert spellcasting benefits (page 219).
MASTER DRUID SPELLCASTING FEAT 18
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Expert Druid Spellcasting, legendary in Nature
You gain the master spellcasting benefits (page 219).
225
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Fighter
You have spent time learning the art of warfare, increasing
your skill with martial arms and at wearing armor. With
further training, you can become a true combat specialist.
Multiclass Fighter characters
The fighter archetype grants access to great feats
for characters focusing on any combat style, and it’s
particularly helpful for characters looking to diversify their
offensive abilities or focus on more powerful weapons.
• Barbarian fighters can combine their talents with
two-handed weapons with some of the fighter’s
two-handed feats to devastating effect.
• Champion fighters focus on a style of combat
exemplified by their deity. A shield-using champion
benefits from the best of both worlds in shield feats.
• Monk fighters are great at combining unusual
weapon styles. For instance, a monks
isn’t hindered by a restriction to
keep one hand free, because they
want to punch you with that
hand anyway.
• Ranger fighters can either specialize in archery
or use their fighter feats to pick up an unusual
combat style combination.
• Rogue fighters can make good use of fighter’s free
hand, two-weapon fighting, or archery feats.
• Spellcaster fighters benefit greatly from the additional
weapon proficiencies, and fighter is a solid choice for
any spellcaster of a particularly martial bent.
FIGHTER DEDICATION FEAT 2
ARCHETYPE DEDICATION MULTICLASS
Prerequisites Strength 14, Dexterity 14
You become trained in simple weapons and martial weapons.
You become trained in your choice of Acrobatics or Athletics;
if you are already trained in both of these skills, you instead
become trained in a skill of your choice. You become trained
in fighter class DC.
Special You cannot select another dedication feat until you
have gained two other feats from the fighter archetype.
BASIC MANEUVER FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Fighter Dedication
You gain a 1st- or 2nd-level fighter feat.
FIGHTER RESILIENCY FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Fighter Dedication, class granting no more Hit
Points per level than 8 + your Constitution modifier
You gain 3 additional Hit Points for each fighter archetype
class feat you have. As you continue selecting fighter
archetype class feats, you continue to gain additional Hit
Points in this way.
OPPORTUNIST FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Fighter Dedication
You gain the Attack of Opportunity reaction, found on
page 142.
ADVANCED MANEUVER FEAT 6
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Basic Maneuver
You gain a fighter feat. For the purpose of meeting its
prerequisites, your fighter level is equal to half your
character level.
Special You can select this feat more than once. Each time
you select it, you gain another fighter feat.
DIVERSE WEAPON EXPERT FEAT 12
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Fighter Dedication, expert in any kind of
weapon or unarmed attack
Your proficiency ranks for simple weapons and martial
weapons increase to expert, and your proficiency rank for
advanced weapons increases to trained.
Core Rulebook
226
Monk
Monastic training has taught you martial arts and allowed
you to hone your mind, body, and spirit to new heights.
Multiclass MONK characters
The monk archetype is a strong choice for any character
that fights unarmored or with unarmed attacks.
• Barbarian monks with the animal instinct can
combine the barbarian’s excellent unarmed damage
with the monk’s diverse unarmed special abilities.
• Champion monks are perfect for champions of
Irori or other deities who favor unarmed attacks.
• Fighter monks can supplement free-hand fighting
and add mobility to the fighter’s toolkit.
• Rogue monks are incredibly effective because
stances grant some of the best agile finesse attacks
and flurry gives more sneak attacks.
• Spellcaster monks can fight with a free hand and
still use material components to cast spells.
MONK DEDICATION FEAT 2
ARCHETYPE DEDICATION MULTICLASS
Prerequisites Strength 14, Dexterity 14
You become trained in unarmed attacks and gain the
powerful fist class feature (page 156). You become
trained in your choice of Acrobatics or Athletics; if
you are already trained in both of these skills, you
become trained in a skill of your choice. You become
trained in monk class DC.
Special You can’t select another dedication feat until you have
gained two other feats from the monk archetype.
BASIC KATA FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Monk Dedication
You gain a 1st- or 2nd-level monk feat.
MONK RESILIENCY FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Monk Dedication, class granting no more Hit
Points per level than 8 + your Constitution modifier
You gain 3 additional Hit Points for each monk archetype class
feat you have. As you continue selecting monk archetype class
feats, you continue to gain additional Hit Points in this way.
ADVANCED KATA FEAT 6
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Basic Kata
You gain one monk feat. For the purpose of meeting its
prerequisites, your monk level is equal to half your character level.
Special You can select this feat more than once. Each time
you select it, you gain another monk feat.
MONK MOVES FEAT 8
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Monk Dedication
You gain a +10-foot status bonus to your Speed when you’re
not wearing armor.
MONK’S FLURRY FEAT 10
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Monk Dedication
You gain the Flurry of Blows action (page 156).
PERFECTION’S PATH FEAT 12
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Monk Dedication, expert in at least one
saving throw
Choose one saving throw (Fortitude, Reflex, or Will) in which
you are an expert. Your proficiency rank in the chosen saving
throw increases to master.
227
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Ranger
You have studied hunting, tracking, and wilderness
survival, adding a ranger’s tools to your skill set.
Multiclass Ranger characters
The ranger archetype has access to excellent options to
improve a character’s monster knowledge and survival
skills, but ranger is of particular interest to any character
wanting to become a dedicated archer.
• Alchemist rangers can add snares to their daily
free items, benefiting from a strong Crafting
modifier, and their Intelligence makes them
exceptional with monster knowledge feats. The
ranger archetype is also useful to bombers who
want to alternate with in bow attacks.
• Champion rangers are particularly fitting for
deities who connect thematically to nature or have
a bow as their favored weapon. (Or, in the case of
Erastil, both!)
• Fighter rangers are among the most fearsome
archers, combining the best archery feats from
both classes to create a fighting style unique to
each fighter ranger.
• Rogue rangers make excellent snipers or ranged
skirmishers, and snares let them be on the other
side of traps for a change.
• Spellcaster rangers benefit greatly from ranger’s
feat support, backing up their spells with ranged
weapon attacks. Druids have the most thematic
overlap with rangers among the spellcasters,
allowing you to create a true master of
the wilderness.
RANGER DEDICATION FEAT 2
ARCHETYPE DEDICATION MULTICLASS
Prerequisites Dexterity 14
You become trained in Survival; if you were already trained
in Survival, you instead become trained in another skill of
your choice. You become trained in ranger class DC.
You can use the Hunt Prey action (page 168).
Special You cannot select another dedication
feat until you have gained two other feats from the
ranger archetype.
BASIC HUNTER’S TRICK FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Ranger Dedication
You gain a 1st- or 2nd-level ranger feat.
RANGER RESILIENCY FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Ranger Dedication, class granting no more Hit
Points per level than 8 + your Constitution modifier
You gain 3 additional Hit Points for each ranger archetype
class feat you have. As you continue selecting ranger
archetype class feats, you continue to gain additional Hit
Points in this way.
ADVANCED HUNTER’S TRICK FEAT 6
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Basic Hunter’s Trick
You gain one ranger feat. For the purpose of meeting
its prerequisites, your ranger level is equal to half your
character level.
Special You can select this feat more than once. Each time
you select it, you gain another ranger feat.
MASTER SPOTTER FEAT 12
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Ranger Dedication, expert in Perception
Your proficiency rank in Perception increases to master.
Core Rulebook
228
Rogue
You’ve learned to sneak, steal, and disable traps. With time
and luck, you’ll become capable of moving through the
shadows, striking unseen, and escaping without notice.
Multiclass Rogue characters
Nearly any character can benefit from the many skills
and tricks the rogue archetype grants.
• Alchemist rogues can use the rogue’s Poison
Weapon to great effect with their daily poisons,
and sneak attack is a nice boost to bomb damage.
• Barbarian rogues can become masters in every
save and diversify their skills.
• Champion rogues add damage from sneak attack
while protecting their flanking partners from harm.
• Fighter rogues combine the fighter’s accuracy with
extra damage, a deadly combination for archers or
finesse fighters.
• Monk rogues have great synergy, since many stances
grant powerful Strikes that work with sneak attack.
• Ranger rogues benefit from the shared focus on
trailing foes and catching them flat-footed. The
flurry edge can get you many sneak attacks, and the
precision edge doubles down on precision damage.
• Spellcaster rogues use the rogue multiclass to shore
up skills or to pick up tricky rogue feats
like Mobility to help keep them safe.
ROGUE DEDICATION FEAT 2
ARCHETYPE DEDICATION MULTICLASS
Prerequisites Dexterity 14
You gain a skill feat and the rogue’s surprise attack class feature
(page 181). You become trained in light armor. In addition, you
become trained in Stealth or Thievery plus one skill of your
choice; if you are already trained in both Stealth and Thievery,
you become trained in an additional skill of your choice. You
become trained in rogue class DC.
Special You cannot gain another dedication feat until you
have gained two other feats from the rogue archetype.
BASIC TRICKERY FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Rogue Dedication
You gain a 1st- or 2nd-level rogue feat.
SNEAK ATTACKER FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Rogue Dedication
You gain the sneak attack class feature (page 181), except
it deals 1d4 damage, increasing to 1d6 at 6th level. You
don’t increase the number of dice as you gain levels.
ADVANCED TRICKERY FEAT 6
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Basic Trickery
You gain one rogue feat. For the purpose of meeting
its prerequisites, your rogue level is equal to half your
character level.
Special You can select this feat more than once. Each time
you select it, you gain another rogue feat.
SKILL MASTERY FEAT 8
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Rogue Dedication, trained in at least one skill
and expert in at least one skill
Increase your proficiency rank in one of your skills from
expert to master and in another of your skills from trained to
expert. You gain a skill feat associated with one of the skills
you chose.
Special You can select this feat up to five times.
UNCANNY DODGE FEAT 10
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Rogue Dedication
You gain the deny advantage class feature (page 181).
EVASIVENESS FEAT 12
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Rogue Dedication, expert in Reflex saves
Your proficiency rank for Reflex saves increases to master.
229
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Sorcerer
You coax the magic power in your blood to manifest,
accessing magic others don’t expect you to have.
Multiclass Sorcerer characters
The sorcerer archetype is a method for anyone to pick up
commonly useful spells, such as invisibility and haste.
SORCERER DEDICATION FEAT 2
ARCHETYPE DEDICATION MULTICLASS
Prerequisites Charisma 14
Choose a bloodline. You become trained in the bloodline’s
two skills; for each of these skills in which you were already
trained, you become trained in a skill of your choice.
You cast spells like a sorcerer. You gain access to the Cast
a Spell activity. You gain a spell repertoire with two common
cantrips from the spell list associated with your bloodline,
or any other cantrips you learn or discover. You’re trained
in spell attack rolls and spell DCs for your tradition’s spells.
Your key spellcasting ability for sorcerer archetype spells
is Charisma, and they are sorcerer spells of your bloodline’s
tradition. You don’t gain any other abilities from your choice
of bloodline.
Special You cannot select another dedication feat until you
have gained two other feats from the sorcerer archetype.
BASIC SORCERER SPELLCASTING FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Sorcerer Dedication
You gain the basic spellcasting benefits (page 219). Each time you
gain a spell slot of a new level from the sorcerer archetype, add a
spell of the appropriate spell level to your repertoire: a common
spell of your bloodline’s tradition, one of your bloodline’s granted
spells, or another spell you have learned or discovered.
BASIC BLOOD POTENCY FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Sorcerer Dedication
You gain a 1st- or 2nd-level sorcerer feat.
BASIC BLOODLINE SPELL FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Sorcerer Dedication
You gain your bloodline’s initial bloodline spell. If you don’t
already have one, you also gain a focus pool of 1 Focus Point,
which you can Refocus without any special effort. (For
more on bloodline spells, see page 194.)
ADVANCED BLOOD POTENCY FEAT 6
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Basic Blood Potency
You gain one sorcerer feat. For the purpose of
prerequisites, your sorcerer level is half your
character level.
Special You can select this feat more than once. Each
time you do, you gain another sorcerer feat.
BLOODLINE BREADTH FEAT 8
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Basic Sorcerer Spellcasting
Your repertoire expands, and you can cast more spells of your
bloodline’s tradition each day. Increase the number of spells
in your repertoire and number of spell slots you gain from
sorcerer archetype feats by 1 for each spell level other than
your two highest spell levels.
EXPERT SORCERER SPELLCASTING FEAT 12
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Basic Sorcerer Spellcasting; master in Arcana,
Nature, Occultism, or Religion, depending on bloodline
You gain the expert spellcasting benefits (page 219).
MASTER SORCERER SPELLCASTING FEAT 18
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Expert Sorcerer Spellcasting; legendary in Arcana,
Nature, Occultism, or Religion, depending on bloodline
You gain the master spellcasting benefits (page 219).
Core Rulebook
230
Wizard
You have dabbled in the arcane arts and, through discipline
and academic study, learned how to cast a few spells.
Multiclass Wizard characters
The wizard archetype grants versatile prepared spells,
perfect for characters looking to add some extra utility.
WIZARD DEDICATION FEAT 2
ARCHETYPE DEDICATION MULTICLASS
Prerequisites Intelligence 14
You cast spells like a wizard, gaining a spellbook with four
common arcane cantrips of your choice. You gain the Cast a
Spell activity. You can prepare two cantrips each day from
your spellbook. You’re trained in arcane spell attack rolls
and spell DCs. Your key spellcasting ability for wizard
archetype spells is Int, and they are arcane wizard
spells. You become trained in Arcana; if you were
already trained in Arcana, you instead become trained
in a skill of your choice.
Special You can’t select another dedication feat until you
have gained two other feats from the wizard archetype.
ARCANE SCHOOL SPELL FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisite Wizard Dedication
Select one arcane school of magic. You gain the school’s initial
school spell. If you don’t already have one, you gain a focus
pool of 1 Focus Point, which you can Refocus by studying. (For
more on arcane schools, see page 204.)
BASIC ARCANA FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Wizard Dedication
You gain a 1st- or 2nd-level wizard feat of your choice.
BASIC WIZARD SPELLCASTING FEAT 4
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Wizard Dedication
You gain the basic spellcasting benefits (page 219). Each time
you gain a spell slot of a new level from the wizard archetype,
add two common spells of that level to your spellbook.
ADVANCED ARCANA FEAT 6
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Basic Arcana
You gain one wizard feat. For the purpose of meeting
its prerequisites, your wizard level is equal to half your
character level.
Special You can select this feat more than once. Each time
you select it, you gain another wizard feat.
ARCANE BREADTH FEAT 8
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Basic Wizard Spellcasting
You can cast more arcane spells each day. Increase the spell
slots you gain from wizard archetype feats by 1 for each spell
level other than your two highest spell levels.
EXPERT WIZARD SPELLCASTING FEAT 12
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Basic Wizard Spellcasting, master in Arcana
You gain the expert spellcasting benefits (page 219).
MASTER WIZARD SPELLCASTING FEAT 18
ARCHETYPE
Prerequisites Expert Wizard Spellcasting, legendary in Arcana
You gain the master spellcasting benefits (page 219).
231
CLASSES 3
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Core Rulebook
232
Chapter 4: Skills
While your character’s ability scores represent their raw talent and potential, skills represent
their training and experience at performing certain tasks. Each skill is keyed to one of your
character’s ability scores and used for an array of related actions. Your character’s expertise
in a skill comes from several sources, including their background and class. In this chapter,
you’ll learn about skills, their scope, and the actions they can be used for.
A character’s acumen in skills can come from all sorts of training, from practicing
acrobatic tricks to studying academic topics to rehearsing a performing art. When
you create your character and as they advance in level, you have flexibility as to
which skills they become better at and when. Some classes depend heavily on
certain skills—such as the alchemist’s reliance on Crafting—but for most classes,
you can choose whichever skills make the most sense for your character’s theme and
backstory at 1st level, then use their adventure and downtime experiences to inform
how their skills should improve as your character levels up.
A character gains training in certain skills at 1st level: typically two skills from
their background, a small number of predetermined skills from their class, and
several skills of your choice granted by your class. This training increases your
proficiency ranks for those skills to trained instead of untrained and lets you use
more of the skills’ actions. Sometimes you might gain training in a specific skill from
multiple sources, such as if your background granted training in Crafting and you
took the alchemist class, which also grants training in Crafting. Each time after the
first that you would gain the trained proficiency rank in a given skill, you instead
allocate the trained proficiency to any other skill of your choice.
Key Ability
Each skill is tied to a key ability. You add your modifier for this ability to checks
and DCs when using that skill. For example, skulking about the shadows of a city at
night with Stealth uses your Dexterity modifier, navigating the myriad personalities
and power plays of court politics with Society uses your Intelligence modifier, and
so on. The key ability for each skill is listed on Table 4–1: Skills, Key Abilities, and
Actions on page 235 and also appears in parentheses following the skill’s name
in the descriptions on the following pages. If the GM deems it appropriate for a
certain situation, however, they might have you use a different ability modifier for
a skill check or when determining your skill DC.
Skill Actions
The actions you can perform with a given skill are sorted into those you can use
untrained and those that require you to be trained in the skill, as shown on Table
4–1: Skills, Key Abilities, and Actions (page 235). The untrained and trained actions
of each skill appear in separate sections within the skill’s description.
Anyone can use a skill’s untrained actions, but you can use trained actions only
if you have a proficiency rank of trained or better in that skill. A circumstance,
condition, or effect might bar you from a skill action regardless of your proficiency
rank, and sometimes using a skill in a specific situation might require you to have a
higher proficiency rank than what is listed on the table. For instance, even though
a barbarian untrained in Arcana could identify a construct with a lucky roll using
Arcana to Recall Knowledge, the GM might decide that Recalling Knowledge
to determine the spells used to create such a construct is beyond the scope of
the barbarian’s anecdotal knowledge. The GM decides whether a task requires a
particular proficiency rank.
IMPROVING SKILLS
As your character advances
in level, there are two main
ways their skills improve: skill
increases and skill feats. Your
class lists the levels at which you
gain each of these improvements.
SKILL INCREASES
Skill increases improve your
proficiency in skills of your
choice. You can use these
increases to become trained
in new skills or increase your
proficiency rank in skills you’re
trained in (from trained to
expert at any level, expert to
master at 7th level or higher,
and master to legendary at 15th
level or higher). Unlike when
you first become trained at a
skill, if two different abilities
would make you an expert,
master, or legendary in a skill,
you don’t get to choose a second
skill to become expert in—the
redundant benefit simply has
no effect.
SKILL FEATS
Skill feats are a type of general
feat that often grant you a
new way to use a skill or make
you better at using a skill in a
particular way. Skill feats always
have the skill trait. These feats
appear in Chapter 5.
4
233
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Skill Checks and Skill DCs
When you’re actively using a skill, often by performing
one of its actions, you might attempt a skill check: rolling
a d20 and adding your skill modifier. To determine this
modifier, add your ability modifier for the skill’s key ability,
your proficiency bonus for the skill, and any other bonuses
and penalties.
Skill modifier = modifier of the skill’s key ability
score + proficiency bonus + other bonuses + penalties
When writing down the modifier on your character
sheet, you should write down only the numbers that always
apply—typically just your ability modifier and proficiency
bonus at 1st level. At higher levels, you may wear or use
items to improve your skills with item bonuses pretty much
all the time; you should write those down, too.
The GM sets the DC of a skill check, using the guidelines
in Chapter 10: Game Mastering. The most important DCs
to remember are the five simple skill DCs below.
Task Difficulty Simple DC
Untrained 10
Trained 15
Expert 20
Master 30
Legendary 40
When someone or something tests your skill, they
attempt a check against your skill DC, which is equal to 10
plus your skill modifier. A skill DC works like any other DC
to determine the effect of an opposing creature’s skill action.
See page 444 in Chapter 9: Playing the Game for more
information about modifiers, bonuses, and penalties.
Armor and Skills
Some armor imposes a penalty on specific skill checks and
DCs. If a creature is wearing armor that imparts a skill
penalty, that penalty is applied to the creature’s Strengthand Dexterity-based skill checks and skill DCs, unless the
action has the attack trait. Check penalties from armor are
detailed on page 274 in Chapter 6: Equipment.
Secret Checks
Sometimes you won’t know whether you succeed at a skill
check. If an action has the secret trait, the GM rolls the check
for you and informs you of the effect without revealing the
result of the roll or the degree of success. The GM rolls
secret checks when your knowledge about the outcome is
imperfect, like when you’re searching for a hidden creature
or object, attempting to deceive someone, translating a
tricky bit of ancient text, or remembering some piece of lore.
This way, you as the player don’t know things that your
character wouldn’t. This rule is the default for actions with
the secret trait, but the GM can choose not to use secret
checks if they would rather some or all rolls be public.
Exploration and Downtime Activities
Some skill activities have the exploration or downtime
trait. Exploration activities usually take a minute or more,
while downtime activities may take a day or more. They
usually can’t be used during an encounter, though the GM
might bend this restriction. If you’re not sure whether you
have the time to use one of these activities, ask your GM.
General Skill Actions
General skill actions are skill actions that can be used
with multiple different skills. When you use a general skill
action, you might use your modifier from any skill that lists
it as one of the skill’s actions, depending on the situation.
General Skill Action Proficiency Page
Decipher Writing Trained 234
Earn Income Trained 236
Identify Magic Trained 238
Learn a Spell Trained 238
Recall Knowledge [one-action] Untrained 238
Subsist Untrained 240
Decipher Writing (Trained)
When you encounter particularly archaic or esoteric texts,
the GM might require you to Decipher the Writing before
you can understand it. You must be trained in the relevant
skill to Decipher Writing. Arcana is typically used for
writing about magic or science, Occultism for esoteric texts
about mysteries and philosophy, Religion for scripture, and
Society for coded messages or archaic documents.
DECIPHER WRITING
CONCENTRATE EXPLORATION SECRET
You attempt to decipher complicated writing or literature on an
obscure topic. This usually takes 1 minute per page of text, but
might take longer (typically an hour per page for decrypting
ciphers or the like). The text must be in a language you can
read, though the GM might allow you to attempt to decipher
text written in an unfamiliar language using Society instead.
The DC is determined by the GM based on the state or
complexity of the document. The GM might have you roll one
check for a short text or a check for each section of a larger text.
Critical Success You understand the true meaning of the text.
Success You understand the true meaning of the text. If it was
a coded document, you know the general meaning but might
not have a word-for-word translation.
Failure You can’t understand the text and take a –2 circumstance
penalty to further checks to decipher it.
Critical Failure You believe you understand the text on that
page, but you have in fact misconstrued its message.
Sample Decipher Tasks
Trained entry-level philosophy treatise
Expert complex code, such as a cipher
Core Rulebook
234
TABLE 4–1: SKILLS, KEY ABILITIES, AND ACTIONS
Skill Key Ability Untrained Actions Trained Actions
Acrobatics Dexterity Balance [one-action] Maneuver in Flight [one-action]
Tumble Through [one-action] SqueezeE
Arcana Intelligence Recall KnowledgeG [one-action] Borrow an Arcane SpellE
Decipher WritingE, G
Identify MagicE, G
Learn a SpellE, G
Athletics Strength Climb [one-action] Disarm [one-action]
Force Open [one-action]
 Grapple [one-action]
High Jump [two-actions]
Long Jump [two-actions]
 Shove [one-action]
 Swim [one-action]
 Trip [one-action]
Crafting Intelligence Recall KnowledgeG [one-action] CraftD
 RepairE Earn IncomeD, G
Identify AlchemyE
Deception Charisma Create a Diversion [one-action] Feint [one-action]
 ImpersonateE
 Lie
Diplomacy Charisma Gather InformationE
Make an ImpressionE
 Request [one-action]
Intimidation Charisma CoerceE
 Demoralize [one-action]
Lore Intelligence Recall KnowledgeG [one-action] Earn Income
D, G
Medicine Wisdom Administer First Aid [two-actions] Treat DiseaseD
Recall KnowledgeG [one-action] Treat Poison [one-action]
Treat WoundsE
Nature Wisdom Command an Animal [one-action] Identify MagicE, G
Recall KnowledgeG [one-action] Learn a SpellE, G
Occultism Intelligence Recall KnowledgeG [one-action] Decipher WritingE, G
Identify MagicE, G
Learn a SpellE, G
Performance Charisma Perform [one-action] Earn IncomeD, G
Religion Wisdom Recall KnowledgeG [one-action] Decipher Writing
E, G
Identify MagicE, G
Learn a SpellE, G
Society Intelligence Recall KnowledgeG [one-action] Create ForgeryD
 SubsistD, G Decipher WritingE, G
Stealth Dexterity Conceal an Object [one-action]
 Hide [one-action]
Sneak [one-action]
Survival Wisdom Sense DirectionE Cover TracksE
 SubsistD, G TrackE
Thievery Dexterity Palm an Object [one-action] Disable a Device [two-actions]
 Steal [one-action] Pick a Lock [two-actions] D This skill action can be used only during downtime.
E This skill action is used during exploration.
G This is a general skill action, with a description appearing on pages 234–240 instead of under the entries for the
various skills it’s used for.
Skills 4
235
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
EXTRA PREPARATION
When Earning Income, you might be able to spend days
of downtime to prepare for your task, which adjusts the
DC of the skill check. This might involve rehearsing a play,
studying a topic, and so on. The GM determines how long
preparation takes and how much the DC changes. This is
most useful when you’re trying a task that’s higher level
than you; otherwise such tasks have an increased DC!
ENDING OR INTERRUPTING TASKS
When a task you’re doing is complete, or if you stop
in the middle of one, you normally have to find a new
task if you want to keep Earning Income. For instance,
if you quit your job working at the docks, you’ll need to
find another place of employment instead of picking up
where you left off. This usually takes 1 day or more of
downtime looking for leads on new jobs.
However, you might pause a task due to an adventure or
event that wouldn’t prevent you from returning to the old
job later. The GM might decide that you can pick up where
you left off, assuming the task hasn’t been completed by
others in your absence. Whether you roll a new skill check
when you resume is also up to the GM. Generally speaking,
if you had a good initial roll and want to keep it, you can,
but if you had a bad initial roll, you can’t try for a better one
by pausing to do something else. If your statistics changed
during the break—usually because you leveled up while
adventuring—you can attempt a new check.
Master spymaster’s code or advanced research notes
Legendary esoteric planar text written in metaphor by an
ancient celestial
Earn Income (Trained)
You can use a skill—typically Crafting, Lore, or
Performance—to earn money during downtime. You
must be trained in the skill to do so. This takes time to
set up, and your income depends on your proficiency
rank and how lucrative a task you can find. Because this
process requires a significant amount of time and involves
tracking things outside the progress of adventures, it
won’t come up in every campaign.
In some cases, the GM might let you use a different skill
to Earn Income through specialized work. Usually, this is
scholarly work, such as using Religion in a monastery to
study old texts—but giving sermons at a church would still
fall under Performance instead of Religion. You also might
be able to use physical skills to make money, such as using
Acrobatics to perform feats in a circus or Thievery to pick
pockets. If you’re using a skill other than Crafting, Lore, or
Performance, the DC tends to be significantly higher.
EARN INCOME
DOWNTIME
You use one of your skills to make money during downtime.
The GM assigns a task level representing the most lucrative
job available. You can search for lower-level tasks, with the
GM determining whether you find any. Sometimes you can
attempt to find better work than the initial offerings, though
TABLE 4–2: INCOME EARNED
Task Level Failure Trained Expert Master Legendary
0 1 cp 5 cp 5 cp 5 cp 5 cp
1 2 cp 2 sp 2 sp 2 sp 2 sp
2 4 cp 3 sp 3 sp 3 sp 3 sp
3 8 cp 5 sp 5 sp 5 sp 5 sp
4 1 sp 7 sp 8 sp 8 sp 8 sp
5 2 sp 9 sp 1 gp 1 gp 1 gp
6 3 sp 1 gp, 5 sp 2 gp 2 gp 2 gp
7 4 sp 2 gp 2 gp, 5 sp 2 gp, 5 sp 2 gp, 5 sp
8 5 sp 2 gp, 5 sp 3 gp 3 gp 3 gp
9 6 sp 3 gp 4 gp 4 gp 4 gp
10 7 sp 4 gp 5 gp 6 gp 6 gp
11 8 sp 5 gp 6 gp 8 gp 8 gp
12 9 sp 6 gp 8 gp 10 gp 10 gp
13 1 gp 7 gp 10 gp 15 gp 15 gp
14 1 gp, 5 sp 8 gp 15 gp 20 gp 20 gp
15 2 gp 10 gp 20 gp 28 gp 28 gp
16 2 gp, 5 sp 13 gp 25 gp 36 gp 40 gp
17 3 gp 15 gp 30 gp 45 gp 55 gp
18 4 gp 20 gp 45 gp 70 gp 90 gp
19 6 gp 30 gp 60 gp 100 gp 130 gp
20 8 gp 40 gp 75 gp 150 gp 200 gp
20 (critical success) — 50 gp 90 gp 175 gp 300 gp
Core Rulebook
236
this takes time and requires using the Diplomacy skill to
Gather Information, doing some research, or socializing.
When you take on a job, the GM secretly sets the DC of your
skill check. After your first day of work, you roll to determine
your earnings. You gain an amount of income based on your
result, the task’s level, and your proficiency rank (as listed on
Table 4–2: Income Earned).
You can continue working at the task on subsequent days
without needing to roll again. For each day you spend after
the first, you earn the same amount as the first day, up until
the task’s completion. The GM determines how long you can
work at the task. Most tasks last a week or two, though some
can take months or even years.
Critical Success You do outstanding work. Gain the amount of
currency listed for the task level + 1 and your proficiency rank.
Success You do competent work. Gain the amount of currency
listed for the task level and your proficiency rank.
Failure You do shoddy work and get paid the bare minimum
for your time. Gain the amount of currency listed in the
failure column for the task level. The GM will likely reduce
how long you can continue at the task.
Critical Failure You earn nothing for your work and are fired
immediately. You can’t continue at the task. Your reputation
suffers, potentially making it difficult for you to find
rewarding jobs in that community in the future.
Sample Earn Income Tasks
These examples use Alcohol Lore to work in a bar or
Legal Lore to perform legal work.
Trained bartend, do legal research
Expert curate drink selection, present minor court cases
Master run a large brewery, present important court cases
Legendary run an international brewing franchise, present
a case in Hell’s courts
Crafting Goods for the Market (Crafting)
Using Crafting, you can work at producing common
items for the market. It’s usually easy to find work making
basic items whose level is 1 or 2 below your settlement’s
level (see Earn Income on page 504). Higher-level tasks
represent special commissions, which might require you to
Craft a specific item using the Craft downtime activity and
sell it to a buyer at full price. These opportunities don’t
occur as often and might have special requirements—or
serious consequences if you disappoint a prominent client.
Practicing a Trade (Lore)
You apply the practical benefits of one of your Lore
specialties during downtime by practicing your trade. This
is most effective for Lore specialties such as business, law,
or sailing, where there’s high demand for workers. The GM
might increase the DC or determine only low-level tasks
are available if you’re attempting to use an obscure Lore
skill to Earn Income. You might also need specialized tools
to accept a job, like mining tools to work in a mine or a
merchant’s scale to buy and sell valuables in a market.
INCOME EXAMPLES
The following examples show the kinds of tasks your
character might take on to Earn Income during low-level
and high-level play.
HARSK MAKES TEA
Harsk is a 3rd-level ranger and an expert at harvesting
and brewing tea. He has a Tea Lore modifier of +7. He
has 30 days of downtime at his disposal and decides to
work at a prestigious local tea house. The GM decides
this is a 5th-level task if Harsk wants to assist the tea
master, or a 2nd-level task if he wants to serve tea.
Harsk chooses the tougher task, and the GM secretly
sets the DC at 20.
Harsk rolls a 4 on his Tea Lore check for a result of 11.
Poor Harsk has failed! He earns only 2 sp for his efforts
and continues working for 3 more days, for a total of
8 sp.
At that point, the GM offers Harsk a choice: either he
can finish out the week with the tea master and look
for a new job, or he can lower his ambitions and serve
in the tea house. Harsk, now more aware of his own
capabilities, accepts the less prestigious job for now.
He moves to his new job and attempts a new Tea Lore
check against DC 16. Rolling a 19, he gets a result of
26—a critical success! He earns 5 sp per day (like a
success at a 3rd-level task). The GM rules that demand
will be high enough that Harsk can work there for the
remainder of his downtime if he so chooses, a total of
26 days. Harsk accepts and earns a total of 138 sp (13
gp, 8 sp) that month.
LEM PERFORMS
Lem is a 16th-level bard and legendary with his flute. He
has a Performance modifier of +31 with his enchanted
flute. With 30 days of downtime ahead of him, Lem
wonders if he can find something that might excite him
more than performing in front of a bunch of stuffy nobles.
He finds a momentous offer indeed—a performance in a
celestial realm, and Lem’s patron goddess Shelyn might
even be in attendance! This is a 20th-level task, and the
GM secretly sets the DC at 40.
Lem rolls an 11 on his Performance check for a result
of 42. Success! The engagement lasts for a week, and
at the end, the grateful celestials present Lem with a
beautiful living diamond rose in constant bloom worth
1,400 gold pieces (200 gp per day for 7 days).
With 23 days of downtime left, Lem accepts a 14thlevel task performing at a prestigious bardic college for
members of a royal court. The GM secretly sets the DC
at 32, and Lem critically succeeds, earning 28 gp per day
for a total of 644 gp. Between the two performances,
Lem has earned just over 2,000 gold pieces during his
downtime—though he’s not sure he’ll ever sell that rose.
Skills 4
237
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Staging a Performance (Performance)
You perform for an audience to make money. The available
audiences determine the level of your task, since more
discerning audiences are harder to impress but provide a
bigger payout. The GM determines the task level based on
the audiences available. Performing for a typical audience of
commoners on the street is a level 0 task, but a performance
for a group of artisans with more refined tastes might be a
2nd- or 3rd-level task, and ones for merchants, nobility, and
royalty are increasingly higher level. Your degree of success
determines whether you moved your audience and whether
you were rewarded with applause or rotten fruit.
Identify Magic (Trained)
Using the skill related to the appropriate tradition, as
explained in Magical Traditions and Skills on page 238,
you can attempt to identify a magical item, location,
or ongoing effect. In many cases, you can use a skill to
attempt to Identify Magic of a tradition other than your
own at a higher DC. The GM determines whether you can
do this and what the DC is.
IDENTIFY MAGIC
CONCENTRATE EXPLORATION SECRET
Once you discover that an item, location, or ongoing effect
is magical, you can spend 10 minutes to try to identify the
particulars of its magic. If your attempt is interrupted, you
must start over. The GM sets the DC for your check. Cursed
or esoteric subjects usually have higher DCs or might even be
impossible to identify using this activity alone. Heightening a
spell doesn’t increase the DC to identify it.
Critical Success You learn all the attributes of the magic,
including its name (for an effect), what it does, any means of
activating it (for an item or location), and whether it is cursed.
Success For an item or location, you get a sense of what it does
and learn any means of activating it. For an ongoing effect
(such as a spell with a duration), you learn the effect’s name
and what it does. You can’t try again in hopes of getting a
critical success.
Failure You fail to identify the magic and can’t try again for 1 day.
Critical Failure You misidentify the magic as something else
of the GM’s choice.
Magical Traditions and Skills
Each magical tradition has a corresponding skill, as shown
on the table below. You must have the trained proficiency
rank in a skill to use it to Identify Magic or Learn a Spell.
Something without a specific tradition, such as an item with
the magical trait, can be identified using any of these skills.
Magical Tradition Corresponding Skill
Arcane Arcana
Divine Religion
Occult Occultism
Primal Nature
Learn a Spell (Trained)
If you’re a spellcaster, you can use the skill corresponding
to your magical tradition to learn a new spell of that
tradition. Table 4–3: Learning a Spell lists the Price of the
materials needed to Learn a Spell of each level.
LEARN A SPELL
CONCENTRATE EXPLORATION
Requirements You have a spellcasting class feature, and the
spell you want to learn is on your magical tradition’s spell list.
You can gain access to a new spell of your tradition from
someone who knows that spell or from magical writing like a
spellbook or scroll. If you can cast spells of multiple traditions,
you can Learn a Spell of any of those traditions, but you must
use the corresponding skill to do so. For example, if you were
a cleric with the bard multiclass archetype, you couldn’t use
Religion to add an occult spell to your bardic spell repertoire.
To learn the spell, you must do the following:
• Spend 1 hour per level of the spell, during which you
must remain in conversation with a person who knows
the spell or have the magical writing in your possession.
• Have materials with the Price indicated in Table 4–3.
• Attempt a skill check for the skill corresponding to your
tradition (DC determined by the GM, often close to the
DC on Table 4–3). Uncommon or rare spells have higher
DCs; full guidelines for the GM appear on page 503.
If you have a spellbook, Learning a Spell lets you add the
spell to your spellbook; if you prepare spells from a list, it’s
added to your list; if you have a spell repertoire, you can select
it when you add or swap spells.
Critical Success You expend half the materials and learn the spell.
Success You expend the materials and learn the spell.
Failure You fail to learn the spell but can try again after you
gain a level. The materials aren’t expended.
Critical Failure As failure, plus you expend half the materials.
TABLE 4–3: LEARNING A SPELL
Spell Level Price Typical DC
1st or cantrip 2 gp 15
2nd 6 gp 18
3rd 16 gp 20
4th 36 gp 23
5th 70 gp 26
6th 140 gp 28
7th 300 gp 31
8th 650 gp 34
9th 1,500 gp 36
10th 7,000 gp 41
Recall Knowledge (Untrained)
To remember useful information on a topic, you can
attempt to Recall Knowledge. You might know basic
information about something without needing to attempt
a check, but Recall Knowledge requires you to stop and
think for a moment so you can recollect more specific
Core Rulebook
238
facts and apply them. You might even need to spend time
investigating first. For instance, to use Medicine to learn
the cause of death, you might need to conduct a forensic
examination before attempting to Recall Knowledge.
RECALL KNOWLEDGE [one-action]
CONCENTRATE SECRET
You attempt a skill check to try to remember a bit of knowledge
regarding a topic related to that skill. The GM determines the
DCs for such checks and which skills apply.
Critical Success You recall the knowledge accurately and gain
additional information or context.
Success You recall the knowledge accurately or gain a useful
clue about your current situation.
Critical Failure You recall incorrect information or gain an
erroneous or misleading clue.
The following skills can be used to Recall Knowledge,
getting information about the listed topics. In some cases,
you can get the GM’s permission to use a different but
related skill, usually against a higher DC than normal. Some
topics might appear on multiple lists, but the skills could
give different information. For example, Arcana might tell
you about the magical defenses of a golem, whereas Crafting
could tell you about its sturdy resistance to physical attacks.
• Arcana: Arcane theories, magical traditions,
creatures of arcane significance, and arcane planes.
• Crafting: Alchemical reactions and creatures, item
value, engineering, unusual materials, and constructs.
• Lore: The subject of the Lore skill’s subcategory.
• Medicine: Diseases, poisons, wounds, and forensics.
• Nature: The environment, flora, geography, weather,
creatures of natural origin, and natural planes.
• Occultism: Ancient mysteries, obscure philosophy,
creatures of occult significance, and esoteric planes.
• Religion: Divine agents, divine planes, theology,
obscure myths, and creatures of religious significance.
• Society: Local history, key personalities, legal
institutions, societal structure, and humanoid culture.
The GM might allow checks to Recall Knowledge
using other skills. For example, you might assess the skill
of an acrobat using Acrobatics. If you’re using a physical
skill (like in this example), the GM will most likely have
you use a mental ability score—typically Intelligence—
instead of the skill’s normal physical ability score.
Recall Knowledge Tasks
These examples use Society or Religion.
Untrained name of a ruler, key noble, or major deity
Trained line of succession for a major noble family, core
doctrines of a major deity
Expert genealogy of a minor noble, teachings of an
ancient priest
Master hierarchy of a genie noble court, major extraplanar
temples of a deity
Legendary existence of a long-lost noble heir, secret
doctrines of a religion
Skills 4
239
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Subsist (Untrained)
If you need to provide food and shelter, you can use the
Subsist downtime activity. This typically uses Society if
you’re in a settlement or Survival if you’re in the wild.
SUBSIST
DOWNTIME
You try to provide food and shelter for yourself, and possibly
others as well, with a standard of living described on page 294.
The GM determines the DC based on the nature of the place
where you’re trying to Subsist. You might need a minimum
proficiency rank to Subsist in particularly strange environments.
Unlike most downtime activities, you can Subsist after 8 hours
or less of exploration, but if you do, you take a –5 penalty.
Critical Success You either provide a subsistence living for
yourself and one additional creature, or you improve your
own food and shelter, granting yourself a comfortable living.
Success You find enough food and shelter with basic protection
from the elements to provide you a subsistence living.
Failure You’re exposed to the elements and don’t get enough
food, becoming fatigued until you attain sufficient food
and shelter.
Critical Failure You attract trouble, eat something you
shouldn’t, or otherwise worsen your situation. You take a
–2 circumstance penalty to checks to Subsist for 1 week.
You don’t find any food at all; if you don’t have any stored
up, you’re in danger of starving or dying of thirst if you
continue failing.
Sample Subsist Tasks
Untrained lush forest with calm weather or large city
with plentiful resources
Trained typical hillside or village
Expert typical mountains or insular hamlet
Master typical desert or city under siege
Legendary barren wasteland or city of undead
Skill Descriptions
The following entries describe the skills in the game. The
heading for each entry provides the skill’s name, with
that skill’s key ability in parentheses. A brief description
of the skill is followed by a list of actions you can use if
you’re untrained in that skill, and then the actions you
can perform if you are trained in that skill. Some actions
list sample tasks for each rank to give you a better
sense of what you can accomplish as your proficiency
increases. As the actions of a skill aren’t comprehensive,
there may be times when the GM asks you to attempt
a skill check without using any of the listed actions, or
times when the GM asks you to roll using a different key
ability modifier.
Most skills include entries for success and failure, as
well as descriptions of what occurs on a critical success or
a critical failure. If either of the critical entries is absent,
treat those results as a success or failure, as normal.
Acrobatics (Dex)
Acrobatics measures your ability to perform tasks requiring
coordination and grace. When you use the Escape basic
action (page 470), you can use your Acrobatics modifier
instead of your unarmed attack modifier.
BALANCE [one-action]
MOVE
Requirements You are in a square that contains a narrow
surface, uneven ground, or another similar feature.
You move across a narrow surface or uneven ground,
attempting an Acrobatics check against its Balance DC. You
are flat-footed while on a narrow surface or uneven ground.
Critical Success You move up to your Speed.
Success You move up to your Speed, treating it as difficult
terrain (every 5 feet costs 10 feet of movement).
Failure You must remain stationary to keep your balance
(wasting the action) or you fall. If you fall, your turn ends.
Critical Failure You fall and your turn ends.
Sample Balance Tasks
Untrained tangled roots, uneven cobblestones
Trained wooden beam
Expert deep, loose gravel
Master tightrope, smooth sheet of ice
Legendary razor’s edge, chunks of floor falling in midair
TUMBLE THROUGH [one-action]
MOVE
You Stride up to your Speed. During this movement, you can try
to move through the space of one enemy. Attempt an Acrobatics
check against the enemy’s Reflex DC as soon as you try to enter
its space. You can Tumble Through using Climb, Fly, Swim, or
another action instead of Stride in the appropriate environment.
Success You move through the enemy’s space, treating the
squares in its space as difficult terrain (every 5 feet costs 10
feet of movement). If you don’t have enough Speed to move all
the way through its space, you get the same effect as a failure.
Failure Your movement ends, and you trigger reactions as if
you had moved out of the square you started in.
Acrobatics Trained Actions
MANEUVER IN FLIGHT [one-action]
MOVE
Requirements You have a fly Speed.
You try a difficult maneuver while flying. Attempt an Acrobatics
check. The GM determines what maneuvers are possible, but
they rarely allow you to move farther than your fly Speed.
Success You succeed at the maneuver.
Failure Your maneuver fails. The GM chooses if you simply
can’t move or if some other detrimental effect happens.
The outcome should be appropriate for the maneuver you
attempted (for instance, being blown off course if you were
trying to fly against a strong wind).
Critical Failure As failure, but the consequence is more dire.
Core Rulebook
240
Sample Maneuver in Flight Tasks
Trained steep ascent or descent
Expert fly against the wind, hover midair
Master reverse direction
Legendary fly through gale force winds
SQUEEZE
EXPLORATION MOVE
You contort yourself to squeeze through a space so small you
can barely fit through. This action is for exceptionally small
spaces; many tight spaces are difficult terrain (page 475) that
you can move through more quickly and without a check.
Critical Success You squeeze through the tight space in
1 minute per 10 feet of squeezing.
Success You squeeze through in 1 minute per 5 feet.
Critical Failure You become stuck in the tight space. While
you’re stuck, you can spend 1 minute attempting another
Acrobatics check at the same DC. Any result on that
check other than a critical failure causes you
to become unstuck.
Sample Squeeze Tasks
Trained space barely fitting your
shoulders
Master space barely fitting your head
Arcana (Int)
Arcana measures how much you know about arcane
magic and creatures. Even if you’re untrained, you can
Recall Knowledge (page 238).
• Recall Knowledge about arcane theories; magic
traditions; creatures of arcane significance (like
dragons and beasts); and the Elemental, Astral,
and Shadow Planes.
Arcana Trained ACTIONS
You must be trained in Arcana to use it for the following
general skill actions (page 234).
• Decipher Writing about arcane theory.
• Identify Magic, particularly arcane magic.
• Learn a Spell from the arcane tradition.
BORROW AN ARCANE SPELL
CONCENTRATE EXPLORATION
If you’re an arcane spellcaster who prepares from a spellbook,
you can attempt to prepare a spell from someone else’s
spellbook. The GM sets the DC for the check based on the
spell’s level and rarity; it’s typically a bit easier than Learning
the Spell.
Success You prepare the borrowed spell as part of your normal
spell preparation.
Failure You fail to prepare the spell, but the spell slot
remains available for you to prepare a different
spell. You can’t try to prepare this spell
until the next time you prepare spells.
Athletics (Str)
Athletics allows you to perform deeds of physical
prowess. When you use the Escape basic action (page
470), you can use your Athletics modifier instead of your
unarmed attack modifier.
CLIMB [one-action]
MOVE
Requirements You have both hands free.
You move up, down, or across an incline. Unless it’s
particularly easy, you must attempt an Athletics check. The
GM determines the DC based on the nature of the incline and
Skills 4
241
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
environmental circumstances. You’re flat-footed unless you
have a climb Speed.
Critical Success You move up, across, or safely down the
incline for 5 feet plus 5 feet per 20 feet of your land Speed
(a total of 10 feet for most PCs).
Success You move up, across, or safely down the incline for
5 feet per 20 feet of your land Speed (a total of 5 feet for
most PCs, minimum 5 feet if your Speed is below 20 feet).
Critical Failure You fall. If you began the climb on stable
ground, you fall and land prone.
Sample Climb Tasks
Untrained ladder, steep slope, low-branched tree
Trained rigging, rope, typical tree
Expert wall with small handholds and footholds
Master ceiling with handholds and footholds, rock wall
Legendary smooth surface
TABLE 4–4: CLIMB AND SWIM DISTANCE
This table provides a quick reference for how far you can
move with a Climb or Swim action.
Climb Distance Swim Distance
Speed Success Critical Success Critical
5–15 feet 5 5 5 10
20–35 feet 5 10 10 15
40–55 feet 10 15 15 20
60–65 feet 15 20 20 25
FORCE OPEN [one-action]
ATTACK
Using your body, a lever, or some other tool, you attempt
to forcefully open a door, window, container or heavy gate.
With a high enough result, you can even smash through walls.
Without a crowbar, prying something open takes a –2 item
penalty to the Athletics check to Force Open.
Critical Success You open the door, window, container, or gate
and can avoid damaging it in the process.
Success You break the door, window, container, or gate open,
and the door, window, container, or gate gains the broken
condition. If it’s especially sturdy, the GM might have it take
damage but not be broken.
Critical Failure Your attempt jams the door, window, container,
or gate shut, imposing a –2 circumstance penalty on future
attempts to Force it Open.
Sample Force Open Tasks
Untrained fabric, flimsy glass
Trained ice, sturdy glass
Expert flimsy wooden door, wooden portcullis
Master sturdy wooden door, iron portcullis, metal bar
Legendary stone or iron door
GRAPPLE [one-action]
ATTACK
Requirements You have at least one free hand. Your target
cannot be more than one size larger than you.
You attempt to grab an opponent with your free hand.
Attempt an Athletics check against their Fortitude DC.
You can also Grapple to keep your hold on a creature you
already grabbed.
Critical Success Your opponent is restrained until the end of
your next turn unless you move or your opponent Escapes
(page 470).
Success Your opponent is grabbed until the end of your next
turn unless you move or your opponent Escapes.
Failure You fail to grab your opponent. If you already had
the opponent grabbed or restrained using a Grapple, those
conditions on that creature end.
Critical Failure If you already had the opponent grabbed or
restrained, it breaks free. Your target can either grab you,
as if it succeeded at using the Grapple action against you,
or force you to fall and land prone.
HIGH JUMP [two-actions]
You Stride, then make a vertical Leap and attempt a DC 30
Athletics check to increase the height of your jump. If you
didn’t Stride at least 10 feet, you automatically fail your check.
This DC might be increased or decreased due to the situation,
as determined by the GM.
Critical Success Increase the maximum vertical distance to 8
feet, or increase the maximum vertical distance to 5 feet
and maximum horizontal distance to 10 feet.
Success Increase the maximum vertical distance to 5 feet.
Failure You Leap normally.
Critical Failure You don’t Leap at all, and instead you fall prone
in your space.
Leap
The Leap basic action is used for High Jump and Long
Jump. Leap lets you take a careful, short jump. You can
Leap up to 10 feet horizontally if your Speed is at least
15 feet, or up to 15 feet horizontally if your Speed is at
least 30 feet. You land in the space where your Leap
ends (meaning you can typically clear a 5-foot gap if your
Speed is between 15 feet and 30 feet, or a 10-foot gap
if your Speed is 30 feet or more). If you make a vertical
Leap, you can move up to 3 feet vertically and 5 feet
horizontally onto an elevated surface.
LONG JUMP [two-actions]
You Stride, then make a horizontal Leap and attempt an
Athletics check to increase the length of your jump. The DC
of the Athletics check is equal to the total distance in feet
you’re attempting to move during your Leap (so you’d need
to succeed at a DC 20 check to Leap 20 feet). You can’t Leap
farther than your Speed.
If you didn’t Stride at least 10 feet, or if you attempt to jump
in a different direction than your Stride, you automatically fail
your check. This DC might be increased or decreased due to the
situation, as determined by the GM.
Success Increase the maximum horizontal distance you Leap
to the desired distance.
Core Rulebook
242
Failure You Leap normally.
Critical Failure You Leap normally, but then fall and land prone.
SHOVE [one-action]
ATTACK
Requirements You have at least one hand free. The target
can’t be more than one size larger than you.
You push an opponent away from you. Attempt an Athletics
check against your opponent’s Fortitude DC.
Critical Success You push your opponent up to 10 feet away
from you. You can Stride after it, but you must move the
same distance and in the same direction.
Success You push your opponent back 5 feet. You can Stride
after it, but you must move the same distance and in the
same direction.
Critical Failure You lose your balance, fall, and land prone.
Forced Movement
The Shove action can force a creature to move. When
an effect forces you to move, or if you start falling, the
distance you move is defined by the effect that moved you,
not by your Speed. Because you’re not acting to move, this
doesn’t trigger reactions triggered by movement.
SWIM [one-action]
MOVE
You propel yourself through water. In most calm water, you
succeed at the action without needing to attempt a check. If
you must breathe air and you’re submerged in water, you must
hold your breath each round. If you fail to hold your breath, you
begin to drown (as described on page 478). If the water you are
swimming in is turbulent or otherwise dangerous, you might
have to attempt an Athletics check to Swim.
If you end your turn in water and haven’t succeeded at a
Swim action that turn, you sink 10 feet or get moved by the
current, as determined by the GM. However, if your last action
on your turn was to enter the water, you don’t sink or move
with the current that turn.
Critical Success You move through the water 10 feet, plus 5 feet
per 20 feet of your land Speed (a total of 15 feet for most PCs).
Success You move through the water 5 feet, plus 5 feet per
20 feet of your land Speed (a total of 10 feet for most PCs).
Critical Failure You make no progress, and if you’re holding
your breath, you lose 1 round of air.
Sample Swim Tasks
Untrained lake or other still water
Trained flowing water, like a river
Expert swiftly flowing river
Master stormy sea
Legendary maelstrom, waterfall
TRIP [one-action]
ATTACK
Requirements You have at least one hand free. Your target
can’t be more than one size larger than you.
FALLING
When you fall more than 5 feet, you take falling damage
when you land, which is bludgeoning damage equal to
half the distance you fell. If you take any damage from a
fall, you’re knocked prone when you land.
If you fall into water, snow, or another soft substance,
calculate the damage from the fall as though your fall
were 20 feet shorter. The reduction can’t be greater than
the depth of the water (so when falling into water that is
only 10 feet deep, you treat the fall as 10 feet shorter).
You can Grab an Edge as a reaction (page 472) to reduce
or eliminate the damage from some falls. More detailed
rules for falling damage appear on page 463.
You try to knock an opponent to the ground. Attempt an
Athletics check against the target’s Reflex DC.
Critical Success The target falls and lands prone and takes 1d6
bludgeoning damage.
Success The target falls and lands prone.
Critical Failure You lose your balance and fall and land prone.
Athletics Trained Action
DISARM [one-action]
ATTACK
Requirements You have at least one hand free. The target
can’t be more than one size larger than you.
You try to knock something out of an opponent’s grasp.
Attempt an Athletics check against the opponent’s Reflex DC.
Critical Success You knock the item out of the opponent’s
grasp. It falls to the ground in the opponent’s space.
Success You weaken your opponent’s grasp on the item. Until
the start of that creature’s turn, attempts to Disarm the
opponent of that item gain a +2 circumstance bonus, and
the target takes a –2 circumstance penalty to attacks with
the item or other checks requiring a firm grasp on the item.
Critical Failure You lose your balance and become flat-footed
until the start of your next turn.
Crafting (Int)
You can use this skill to create, understand, and repair items.
Even if you’re untrained, you can Recall Knowledge
(page 238).
• Recall Knowledge about alchemical reactions, the
value of items, engineering, unusual materials,
and alchemical or mechanical creatures. The GM
determines which creatures this applies to, but it
usually includes constructs.
REPAIR
EXPLORATION MANIPULATE
Requirements You have a repair kit (page 291).
You spend 10 minutes attempting to fix a damaged item, placing
the item on a stable surface and using the repair  kit with
Skills 4
243
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
both hands. The GM sets the DC, but it’s usually about the same
DC to Repair a given item as it is to Craft it in the first place. You
can’t Repair a destroyed item.
Critical Success You restore 10 Hit Points to the item, plus an
additional 10 Hit Points per proficiency rank you have in
Crafting (a total of 20 HP if you’re trained, 30 HP if you’re an
expert, 40 HP if you’re a master, or 50 HP if you’re legendary).
Success You restore 5 Hit Points to the item, plus an additional
5 per proficiency rank you have in Crafting (for a total of
10 HP if you are trained, 15 HP if you’re an expert, 20 HP if
you’re a master, or 25 HP if you’re legendary).
Critical Failure You deal 2d6 damage to the item. Apply the
item’s Hardness to this damage.
Crafting Trained Actions
You must be trained in Crafting to use it to Earn Income
(page 236).
• Earn Income by crafting goods for the market.
CRAFT
DOWNTIME MANIPULATE
You can make an item from raw materials. You need the
Alchemical Crafting skill feat to create alchemical items, the
Magical Crafting skill feat to create magic items, and the Snare
Crafting feat to create snares.
To Craft an item, you must meet the following requirements:
• The item is your level or lower. An item that doesn’t list
a level is level 0. If the item is 9th level or higher, you
must be a master in Crafting, and if it’s 16th or higher,
you must be legendary.
• You have the formula for the item; see Getting
Formulas below for more information.
• You have an appropriate set of tools and, in many
cases, a workshop. For example, you need access to a
smithy to forge a metal shield.
• You must supply raw materials worth at least half the
item’s Price. You always expend at least that amount
of raw materials when you Craft successfully. If you’re
in a settlement, you can usually spend currency to get
the amount of raw materials you need, except in the
case of rarer precious materials.
You must spend 4 days at work, at which point you attempt
a Crafting check. The GM determines the DC to Craft the item
based on its level, rarity, and other circumstances.
If your attempt to create the item is successful, you expend
the raw materials you supplied. You can pay the remaining
portion of the item’s Price in materials to complete the item
immediately, or you can spend additional downtime days
working on it. For each additional day you spend, reduce
the value of the materials you need to expend to complete
the item. This amount is determined using Table 4–2: Income
Earned (page 236), based on your proficiency rank in Crafting
and using your own level instead of a task level. After any of
these downtime days, you can complete the item by spending
the remaining portion of its Price in materials. If the downtime
Core Rulebook
244
days you spend are interrupted, you can return to finish
the item later, continuing where you left off. An example of
Crafting appears in the sidebar.
Critical Success Your attempt is successful. Each additional
day spent Crafting reduces the materials needed to complete
the item by an amount based on your level + 1 and your
proficiency rank in Crafting.
Success Your attempt is successful. Each additional day spent
Crafting reduces the materials needed to complete the item
by an amount based on your level and your proficiency rank.
Failure You fail to complete the item. You can salvage the raw
materials you supplied for their full value. If you want to try
again, you must start over.
Critical Failure You fail to complete the item. You ruin 10% of
the raw materials you supplied, but you can salvage the
rest. If you want to try again, you must start over.
Consumables and Ammunition
You can Craft items with the consumable trait in batches,
making up to four of the same item at once with a single
check. This requires you to include the raw materials
for all the items in the batch at the start, and you must
complete the batch all at once. You also Craft non-magical
ammunition in batches, using the quantity listed in Table
6–8: Ranged Weapons (typically 10).
Getting Formulas
You can gain access to the formulas for all common
items in Chapter 6: Equipment by purchasing a basic
crafter’s book (page 287). See the rules on page 293 for
information on how to acquire other formulas.
IDENTIFY ALCHEMY
CONCENTRATE EXPLORATION SECRET
Requirements You have alchemist’s tools (page 287).
You can identify the nature of an alchemical item with 10 minutes
of testing using alchemist’s tools. If your attempt is interrupted
in any way, you must start over.
Success You identify the item and the means of activating it.
Failure You fail to identify the item but can try again.
Critical Failure You misidentify the item as another item of
the GM’s choice.
Deception (Cha)
You can trick and mislead others using disguises, lies, and
other forms of subterfuge.
CREATE A DIVERSION [one-action]
MENTAL
With a gesture, a trick, or some distracting words, you can
create a diversion that draws creatures’ attention elsewhere.
If you use a gesture or trick, this action gains the manipulate
trait. If you use distracting words, it gains the auditory and
linguistic traits.
Attempt a single Deception check and compare it to the
CRAFTING EXAMPLE
Ezren is a 5th-level wizard and an expert in Crafting. He
has a Crafting modifier of +13 and the Magical Crafting
feat. With 2 weeks of downtime ahead of him, he decides
to craft a striking rune, a 4th-level item. The GM secretly
chooses a DC of 19.
The item has a Price of 65 gp, so Ezren prepares 32 gp,
5 sp worth of raw materials. He has another 32 gp, 5 sp
worth of raw materials on hand. After spending 4 days
building and incanting spells, he rolls a 12 on his Crafting
check, for a result of 25. That’s a success! At this point,
Ezren can spend the additional 32 gp, 5 sp worth of
materials to complete the item immediately for 65 gp.
However, Ezren has 10 more days on his hands, so he
decides to spend additional time to complete the item.
Because he’s a 5th-level character and an expert at Crafting,
he reduces the amount he has to pay by 1 gp for each day
spent. After spending 10 days working, he reduces the cost
to complete the item from 65 gp to 55 gp. He spends the
remaining portion of its Price in materials, completes the
striking rune, and goes out on his next adventure. (He could
have stayed home to keep working on the striking rune,
eventually reducing the item’s total Price to just the half he
paid up front, but adventuring is far more lucrative!)
If Ezren’s Crafting check result were a 29 or higher, he’d
have gotten a critical success. In that case, he’d reduce the
remaining amount by 2 gp per day, lowering the amount
needed to complete the item after 10 additional days of
work to 45 gp.
Perception DCs of the creatures whose attention you’re trying
to divert. Whether or not you succeed, creatures you attempt
to divert gain a +4 circumstance bonus to their Perception DCs
against your attempts to Create a Diversion for 1 minute.
Success You become hidden to each creature whose
Perception DC is less than or equal to your result. (The
hidden condition allows you to Sneak away, as described
on page 252.) This lasts until the end of your turn or until
you do anything except Step or use the Hide or the Sneak
action of the Stealth skill (pages 251 and 252). If you Strike
a creature, the creature remains flat-footed against that
attack, and you then become observed. If you do anything
else, you become observed just before you act unless the
GM determines otherwise.
Failure You don’t divert the attention of any creatures whose
Perception DC exceeds your result, and those creatures are
aware you were trying to trick them.
IMPERSONATE
CONCENTRATE EXPLORATION MANIPULATE SECRET
You create a disguise to pass yourself off as someone or
something you are not. Assembling a convincing disguise takes
10 minutes and requires a disguise kit (found on page 290), but
a simpler, quicker disguise might do the job if you’re not trying
to imitate a specific individual, at the GM’s discretion.
Skills 4
245
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
In most cases, creatures have a chance to detect your
deception only if they use the Seek action to attempt
Perception checks against your Deception DC. If you attempt
to directly interact with someone while disguised, the GM
rolls a secret Deception check for you against that creature’s
Perception DC instead. If you’re disguised as a specific
individual, the GM might give creatures you interact with a
circumstance bonus based on how well they know the person
you’re imitating, or the GM might roll a secret Deception
check even if you aren’t directly interacting with others.
Success You trick the creature into thinking you’re the person
you’re disguised as. You might have to attempt a new check
if your behavior changes.
Failure The creature can tell you’re not who you claim to be.
Critical Failure The creature can tell you’re not who you claim
to be, and it recognizes you if it would know you without
a disguise.
LIE
AUDITORY CONCENTRATE LINGUISTIC MENTAL SECRET
You try to fool someone with an untruth. Doing so takes at
least 1 round, or longer if the lie is elaborate. You roll a single
Deception check and compare it against the Perception DC of
every creature you are trying to fool. The GM might give them
a circumstance bonus based on the situation and the nature of
the lie you are trying to tell. Elaborate or highly unbelievable
lies are much harder to get a creature to believe than simpler
and more believable lies, and some lies are so big that it’s
impossible to get anyone to believe them.
At the GM’s discretion, if a creature initially believes your
lie, it might attempt a Perception check later to Sense Motive
against your Deception DC to realize it’s a lie. This usually
happens if the creature discovers enough evidence to counter
your statements.
Success The target believes your lie.
Failure The target doesn’t believe your lie and gains a +4
circumstance bonus against your attempts to Lie for the
duration of your conversation. The target is also more likely
to be suspicious of you in the future.
Deception Trained Action
FEINT [one-action]
MENTAL
Requirements You are within melee reach of the opponent you
attempt to Feint.
With a misleading flourish, you leave an opponent unprepared
for your real attack. Attempt a Deception check against that
opponent’s Perception DC.
Critical Success You throw your enemy’s defenses against
you entirely off. The target is flat-footed against melee
attacks that you attempt against it until the end of your
next turn.
Success Your foe is fooled, but only momentarily. The target is
flat-footed against the next melee attack that you attempt
against it before the end of your current turn.
Critical Failure Your feint backfires. You are flat-footed against
melee attacks the target attempts against you until the end
of your next turn.
Diplomacy (Cha)
You influence others through negotiation and flattery.
GATHER INFORMATION
EXPLORATION SECRET
You canvass local markets, taverns, and gathering places in
an attempt to learn about a specific individual or topic. The
GM determines the DC of the check and the amount of time it
takes (typically 2 hours, but sometimes more), along with any
benefit you might be able to gain by spending coin on bribes,
drinks, or gifts.
Success You collect information about the individual or topic.
The GM determines the specifics.
Critical Failure You collect incorrect information about the
individual or topic.
Sample Gather Information Tasks
Untrained talk of the town
Trained common rumor
Expert obscure rumor, poorly guarded secret
Master well-guarded or esoteric information
Legendary information known only to an incredibly
select few, or only to extraordinary beings
MAKE AN IMPRESSION
AUDITORY CONCENTRATE EXPLORATION LINGUISTIC MENTAL
With at least 1 minute of conversation, during which you engage
in charismatic overtures, flattery, and other acts of goodwill,
you seek to make a good impression on someone to make them
temporarily agreeable. At the end of the conversation, attempt
a Diplomacy check against the Will DC of one target, modified
by any circumstances the GM sees fit. Good impressions (or bad
impressions, on a critical failure) last for only the current social
interaction unless the GM decides otherwise.
Critical Success The target’s attitude toward you improves by
two steps.
Success The target’s attitude toward you improves by one step.
Critical Failure The target’s attitude toward you decreases by
one step.
Changing Attitudes
Your influence on NPCs is measured with a set of attitudes
that reflect how they view your character. These are
only a brief summary of a creature’s disposition. The
GM will supply additional nuance based on the history
and beliefs of the characters you’re interacting with, and
their attitudes can change in accordance with the story.
The attitudes are detailed in the Conditions Appendix and
are summarized here.
• Helpful: Willing to help you and responds favorably to
your requests.
Core Rulebook
246
• Friendly: Has a good attitude toward you, but won’t
necessarily stick their neck out to help you.
• Indifferent: Doesn’t care about you either way. (Most
NPCs start out indifferent.)
• Unfriendly: Dislikes you and doesn’t want to help you.
• Hostile: Actively works against you—and might attack
you just because of their dislike.
No one can ever change the attitude of a player character
with these skills. You can roleplay interactions with
player characters, and even use Diplomacy results if the
player wants a mechanical sense of how convincing or
charming a character is, but players make the ultimate
decisions about how their characters respond.
REQUEST [one-action]
AUDITORY CONCENTRATE LINGUISTIC MENTAL
You can make a request of a creature that’s friendly or helpful
to you. You must couch the request in terms that the target
would accept given their current attitude toward you. The
GM sets the DC based on the difficulty of the request. Some
requests are unsavory or impossible, and even a helpful NPC
would never agree to them.
Critical Success The target agrees to your request without
qualifications.
Success The target agrees to your request, but they might
demand added provisions or alterations to the request.
Failure The target refuses the request, though they might
propose an alternative that is less extreme.
Critical Failure Not only does the target refuse the request,
but their attitude toward you decreases by one step due to
the temerity of the request.
Intimidation (Cha)
You bend others to your will using threats.
COERCE
AUDITORY CONCENTRATE EMOTION EXPLORATION LINGUISTIC MENTAL
With threats either veiled or overt, you attempt to bully a
creature into doing what you want. You must spend at least 1
minute of conversation with a creature you can see and that
can either see or sense you. At the end of the conversation,
attempt an Intimidation check against the target’s Will DC,
modified by any circumstances the GM determines. The
attitudes referenced in the effects below are summarized in
the Changing Attitudes sidebar on page 246 and described in
full in the Conditions Appendix, starting on page 618.
Critical Success The target gives you the information you
seek or agrees to follow your directives so long as they
aren’t likely to harm the target in any way. The target
continues to comply for an amount of time determined by
the GM but not exceeding 1 day, at which point the target
becomes unfriendly (if they weren’t already unfriendly
or hostile). However, the target is too scared of you to
retaliate—at least in the short term.
Success As critical success, but once the target becomes
unfriendly, they might decide to act against you—for
example, by reporting you to the authorities or assisting
your enemies.
Failure The target doesn’t do what you say, and if they were
not already unfriendly or hostile, they become unfriendly.
Critical Failure The target refuses to comply, becomes hostile
if they weren’t already, and can’t be Coerced by you for at
least 1 week.
DEMORALIZE [one-action]
AUDITORY CONCENTRATE EMOTION MENTAL
With a sudden shout, a well-timed taunt, or a cutting putdown, you can shake an enemy’s resolve. Choose a creature
within 30 feet of you who you’re aware of. Attempt an
Intimidation check against that target’s Will DC. If the target
does not understand the language you are speaking, you’re
not speaking a language, or they can’t hear you, you take a
–4 circumstance penalty to the check. Regardless of your
result, the target is temporarily immune to your attempts to
Demoralize it for 10 minutes.
Critical Success The target becomes frightened 2.
Success The target becomes frightened 1.
Lore (Int)
You have specialized information on a narrow topic.
Lore features many subcategories. You might have
Military Lore, Sailing Lore, Vampire Lore, or any similar
subcategory of the skill. Each subcategory counts as its
own skill, so applying a skill increase to Planar Lore
wouldn’t increase your proficiency with Sailing Lore,
for example.
You gain a specific subcategory of the Lore skill from
your background. The GM determines what other
subcategories they’ll allow as Lore skills, though these
categories are always less broad than any of the other
skills that allow you to Recall Knowledge, and they
should never be able to fully or mainly take the place
of another skill’s Recall Knowledge action. For instance,
Magic Lore wouldn’t enable you to recall the same
breadth of knowledge covered by Arcana, Adventuring
Lore wouldn’t simply give you all the information an
adventurer needs, and Planar Lore would not be sufficient
to gain all the information spread across various skills
and subcategories such as Heaven Lore.
If you have multiple subcategories of Lore that could
apply to a check or that would overlap with another skill
in the circumstances, you can use the skill with the better
skill modifier or the one you would prefer to use. If there’s
any doubt whether a Lore skill applies to a specific topic
or action, the GM decides whether it can be used or not.
Even if you’re untrained in Lore, you can use it to
Recall Knowledge (page 238).
• Recall Knowledge about the subject of your Lore
skill’s subcategory.
Skills 4
247
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
COMMON LORE SUBCATEGORIES
You can learn any Lore skill your GM gives you permission
to take. The following list covers a wide variety of
common Lore topics appropriate for most campaigns.
Backgrounds often grant you a Lore from this list.
• Academia Lore
• Accounting Lore
• Architecture Lore
• Art Lore
• Circus Lore
• Engineering Lore
• Farming Lore
• Fishing Lore
• Fortune-Telling Lore
• Games Lore
• Genealogy Lore
• Gladiatorial Lore
• Guild Lore
• Heraldry Lore
• Herbalism Lore
• Hunting Lore
• Labor Lore
• Legal Lore
• Library Lore
• Lore about a specific deity (Abadar Lore, Iomedae
Lore, etc.)
• Lore about a specific creature or narrow category of
creatures (Demon Lore, Owlbear Lore, Vampire Lore, etc.)
• Lore of a specific plane other than the Material Plane,
or the plane in which the game is set if not the Material
Plane (Abyss Lore, Astral Plane Lore, Heaven Lore, etc.)
• Lore about a specific settlement (Absalom Lore,
Magnimar Lore, etc.)
• Lore about a specific terrain (Mountain Lore, River
Lore, etc.)
• Lore of a type of food or drink (Alcohol Lore, Baking
Lore, Butchering Lore, Cooking Lore, Tea Lore, etc.)
• Mercantile Lore
• Midwifery Lore
• Milling Lore
• Mining Lore
• Sailing Lore
• Scouting Lore
• Scribing Lore
• Stabling Lore
• Tanning Lore
• Theater Lore
• Underworld Lore
• Warfare Lore
Lore Trained Action
You must be trained in Lore to use it to Earn Income
(page 236).
• Earn Income by using your knowledge to practice
a trade.
Medicine (Wis)
You can patch up wounds and help people recover from
diseases and poisons. Even if you’re untrained in Medicine,
you can use it to Recall Knowledge (page 238).
• Recall Knowledge about diseases, injuries, poisons,
and other ailments. You can use this to perform
forensic examinations if you spend 10 minutes
(or more, as determined by the GM) checking for
evidence such as wound patterns. This is most useful
when determining how a body was injured or killed.
ADMINISTER FIRST AID [two-actions]
MANIPULATE
Requirements You have healer’s tools (page 290).
You perform first aid on an adjacent creature that is dying or
bleeding. If a creature is both dying and bleeding, choose which
ailment you’re trying to treat before you roll. You can Administer
First Aid again to attempt to remedy the other effect.
• Stabilize Attempt a Medicine check on a creature that
has 0 Hit Points and the dying condition. The DC is
equal to 5 + that creature’s recovery roll DC (typically
15 + its dying value).
• Stop Bleeding Attempt a Medicine check on a creature
that is taking persistent bleed damage (page 452),
giving them a chance to make another flat check to
remove the persistent damage. The DC is usually the DC
of the effect that caused the bleed.
Success If you’re trying to stabilize, the creature loses the dying
condition (but remains unconscious). If you’re trying to stop
bleeding, the creature attempts a flat check to end the bleeding.
Critical Failure If you were trying to stabilize, the creature’s
dying value increases by 1. If you were trying to stop
bleeding, it immediately takes an amount of damage equal
to its persistent bleed damage.
Medicine Trained Actions
TREAT DISEASE
DOWNTIME MANIPULATE
Requirements You have healer’s tools (page 290).
You spend at least 8 hours caring for a diseased creature. Attempt
a Medicine check against the disease’s DC. After you attempt to
Treat a Disease for a creature, you can’t try again until after that
creature’s next save against the disease.
Critical Success You grant the creature a +4 circumstance
bonus to its next saving throw against the disease.
Success You grant the creature a +2 circumstance bonus to its
next saving throw against the disease.
Critical Failure Your efforts cause the creature to take a –2
circumstance penalty to its next save against the disease.
TREAT POISON [one-action]
MANIPULATE
Requirements You have healer’s tools (page 290).
You treat a patient to prevent the spread of poison. Attempt a
Medicine check against the poison’s DC. After you attempt to
Core Rulebook
248
Treat a Poison for a creature, you can’t try again until after the
next time that creature attempts a save against the poison.
Critical Success You grant the creature a +4 circumstance
bonus to its next saving throw against the poison.
Success You grant the creature a +2 circumstance bonus to its
next saving throw against the poison.
Critical Failure Your efforts cause the creature to take a –2
circumstance penalty to its next save against the poison.
TREAT WOUNDS
EXPLORATION HEALING MANIPULATE
Requirements You have healer’s tools (page 290).
You spend 10 minutes treating one injured living creature
(targeting yourself, if you so choose). The target is then
temporarily immune to Treat Wounds actions for 1 hour, but
this interval overlaps with the time you spent treating (so a
patient can be treated once per hour, not once per 70 minutes).
The Medicine check DC is usually 15, though the GM might
adjust it based on the circumstances, such as treating a patient
outside in a storm, or treating magically cursed wounds. If you’re
an expert in Medicine, you can instead attempt a DC 20 check
to increase the Hit Points regained by 10; if you’re a master of
Medicine, you can instead attempt a DC 30 check to increase
the Hit Points regained by 30; and if you’re legendary, you can
instead attempt a DC 40 check to increase the Hit Points regained
by 50. The damage dealt on a critical failure remains the same.
If you succeed at your check, you can continue treating the
target to grant additional healing. If you treat them for a total
of 1 hour, double the Hit Points they regain from Treat Wounds.
The result of your Medicine check determines how many
Hit Points the target regains.
Critical Success The target regains 4d8 Hit Points, and its
wounded condition is removed.
Success The target regains 2d8 Hit Points, and its wounded
condition is removed.
Critical Failure The target takes 1d8 damage.
Nature (Wis)
You know a great deal about the natural world, and you
command and train animals and magical beasts. Even
if you’re untrained in Nature, you can use it to Recall
Knowledge (page 238).
• Recall Knowledge about fauna, flora, geography,
weather, the environment, creatures of natural origin
(like animals, beasts, fey, and plants), the First World,
the Material Plane, and the Elemental Planes.
COMMAND AN ANIMAL [one-action]
AUDITORY CONCENTRATE
You issue an order to an animal. Attempt a Nature check
against the animal’s Will DC. The GM might adjust the DC if the
animal has a good attitude toward you, you suggest a course of
action it was predisposed toward, or you offer it a treat.
You automatically fail if the animal is hostile or unfriendly
to you. If the animal is helpful to you, increase your degree of
COMMANDED ANIMALS
Issuing commands to an animal doesn’t always go
smoothly. An animal is an independent creature with
limited intelligence. Most animals understand only the
simplest instructions, so you might be able to instruct
your animal to move to a certain square but not dictate
a specific path to get there, or command it to attack a
certain creature but not to make its attack nonlethal. The
GM decides the specifics of the action your animal uses.
The animal does what you commanded as soon as
it can, usually as its first action on its next turn. If you
successfully commanded it multiple times, it does what
you said in order. It forgets all commands beyond what it
can accomplish on its turn. If multiple people command
the same animal, the GM determines how the animal
reacts. The GM might also make the DC higher if someone
has already tried to Command the Animal that round.
success by one step. You might be able to Command an Animal
more easily with a feat like Ride (page 266).
Most animals know the Leap, Seek, Stand, Stride, and
Strike basic actions. If an animal knows an activity, such as a
horse’s Gallop, you can Command the Animal to perform the
activity, but you must spend as many actions on Command
an Animal as the activity’s number of actions. You can also
spend multiple actions to Command the Animal to perform
that number of basic actions on its next turn; for instance, you
could spend 3 actions to Command an Animal to Stride three
times or to Stride twice and then Strike.
Success The animal does as you command on its next turn.
Failure The animal is hesitant or resistant, and it does nothing.
Critical Failure The animal misbehaves or misunderstands,
and it takes some other action determined by the GM.
Nature Trained Actions
You must be trained in Nature to use it for the following
general skill actions (page 234).
• Identify Magic, particularly primal magic.
• Learn a Spell from the primal tradition.
Occultism (Int)
You know a great deal about ancient philosophies, esoteric
lore, obscure mysticism, and supernatural creatures. Even
if you’re untrained in Occultism, you can use it to Recall
Knowledge (page 238).
• Recall Knowledge about ancient mysteries; obscure
philosophies; creatures of occult significance (like
aberrations, spirits, and oozes); and the Positive
Energy, Negative Energy, Shadow, Astral, and
Ethereal Planes.
Occultism Trained Actions
You must be trained in Occultism to use it for the
following general skill actions (page 234).
Skills 4
249
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
• Decipher Writing on occult topics, including
complex metaphysical systems, syncretic principles,
weird philosophies, and incoherent ramblings.
• Identify Magic, particularly occult magic.
• Learn a Spell from the occult tradition.
Performance (Cha)
You are skilled at a form of performance, using your
talents to impress a crowd or make a living.
Basic Competence
Some performances require you to be more than just
charismatic, and if you don’t meet the demands of the
art form or the audience, the GM might apply a penalty
based on the relevant ability score. For example, if
you’re dancing and have a negative Dexterity modifier,
you might take a penalty to your attempt at dancing.
Likewise, if you are orating and have a negative
Intelligence modifier, you might have to hope your
raw Charisma can overcome the penalties from your
intellectual shortcomings—or ask someone to help write
your speeches!
Performance Traits
When you use an action that utilizes the Performance
skill, it gains one or more traits relevant to the type of
performance. The GM might change these depending on
the circumstances, but the most common performancebased traits are listed below.
Performance Additional Traits
Act or perform comedy Auditory, linguistic, and visual
Dance Move and visual
Play an instrument Auditory and manipulate
Orate or sing Auditory and linguistic
PERFORM [one-action]
CONCENTRATE
When making a brief performance—one song, a quick dance,
or a few jokes—you use the Perform action. This action is most
useful when you want to prove your capability or impress
someone quickly. Performing rarely has an impact on its
own, but it might influence the DCs of subsequent Diplomacy
checks against the observers—or even change their attitudes—
if the GM sees fit.
Critical Success Your performance impresses the observers,
and they’re likely to share stories of your ability.
Success You prove yourself, and observers appreciate the
quality of your performance.
Failure Your performance falls flat.
Critical Failure You demonstrate only incompetence.
Sample Perform Tasks
Untrained audience of commoners
Trained audience of artisans
Expert audience of merchants or minor nobles
Master audience of high nobility or minor royalty
Legendary audience of major royalty or otherworldly beings
Performance Trained Action
You must be trained in Performance to use it to Earn
Income (page 236).
• Earn Income by staging a performance.
Religion (Wis)
The secrets of deities, dogma, faith, and the realms of
divine creatures both sublime and sinister are open to
you. You also understand how magic works, though
your training imparts a religious slant to that knowledge.
Even if you’re untrained in Religion, you can use it to Recall
Knowledge (page 238).
• Recall Knowledge about divine agents, the finer
points of theology, obscure myths regarding a
faith, and creatures of religious significance (like
celestials, fiends, and undead), the Outer Sphere,
and the Positive and Negative Energy Planes.
Religion Trained Actions
You must be trained in Religion to use it for the following
general skill actions (page 234).
• Decipher Writing of a religious nature, including
allegories, homilies, and proverbs.
• Identify Magic, particularly divine magic.
• Learn a Spell from the divine tradition.
Society (Int)
You understand the people and systems that make
civilization run, and you know the historical events that
make societies what they are today. Further, you can use
that knowledge to navigate the complex physical, societal,
and economic workings of settlements. Even if you’re
untrained in Society, you can use it for the following
general skill actions (page 234).
• Recall Knowledge about local history, important
personalities, legal institutions, societal structure,
and humanoid cultures. The GM might allow
Society to apply to other creatures that are major
elements of society in your region, such as the
draconic nobility in a kingdom of humans ruled
by dragons.
• Subsist in a settlement by finding shelter, scrounging,
or begging for food.
Society Trained Actions
You must be trained in Society to use it to Decipher
Writing (page 234).
• Decipher Writing that’s a coded message, text
written in an incomplete or archaic form, or in
some cases, text in a language you don’t know.
Core Rulebook
250
CREATE FORGERY
DOWNTIME SECRET
You create a forged document, usually over the course of a
day or a week. You must have the proper writing material to
create a forgery. When you Create a Forgery, the GM rolls a
secret DC 20 Society check. If you succeed, the forgery is of
good enough quality that passive observers can’t notice the
fake. Only those who carefully examine the document and
attempt a Perception or Society check against your Society
DC can do so.
If the document’s handwriting doesn’t need to be specific
to a person, you need only to have seen a similar document
before, and you gain up to a +4 circumstance bonus to your
check, as well as to your DC (the GM determines the bonus).
To forge a specific person’s handwriting, you need a sample of
that person’s handwriting.
If your check result was below 20, the forgery has some
obvious signs of being a fake, so the GM compares your
result to each passive observer’s Perception DC or Society DC,
whichever is higher, using the success or failure results below.
Once the GM rolls your check for a document, that same result
is used against all passive observers’ DCs no matter how many
creatures passively observe that document.
An observer who was fooled on a passive glance can still
choose to closely scrutinize the documents on the lookout for
a forgery, using different techniques and analysis methods
beyond the surface elements you successfully forged with
your original check. In that case, the observer can attempt a
Perception or Society check against your Society DC (if they
succeed, they know your document is a forgery).
Success The observer does not detect the forgery.
Failure The observer knows your document is a forgery.
Stealth (Dex)
You are skilled at avoiding detection, allowing you to slip
past foes, hide, or conceal an item.
CONCEAL AN OBJECT [one-action]
MANIPULATE SECRET
You hide a small object on your person (such as a weapon of
light Bulk). When you try to sneak a concealed object past
someone who might notice it, the GM rolls your Stealth check
and compares it to this passive observer’s Perception DC. Once
the GM rolls your check for a concealed object, that same
result is used no matter how many passive observers you
try to sneak it past. If a creature is specifically searching you
for an item, it can attempt a Perception check against your
Stealth DC (finding the object on success).
You can also conceal an object somewhere other than your
person, such as among undergrowth or in a secret compartment
within a piece of furniture. In this case, characters Seeking in
an area compare their Perception check results to your Stealth
DC to determine whether they find the object.
Success The object remains undetected.
Failure The searcher finds the object.
BEING STEALTHY
If you want to sneak around when there are creatures
that can see you, you can use a combination of Hide and
Sneak to do so.
• First, Hide behind something (either by taking
advantage of cover or having the concealed condition
due to fog, a spell, or a similar effect). A successful
Stealth check makes you hidden, though the creatures
still know roughly where you are.
• Second, now that you’re hidden, you can Sneak. That
means you can move at half your Speed and attempt
another Stealth check. If it’s successful, you’re now
undetected. That means the creatures don’t know
which square you’re in anymore.
If you were approaching creatures that didn’t know
you were there, you could begin Sneaking right away,
since they didn’t know your location to start with. Some
actions can cause you to become observed again, but
they’re mostly what you’d expect: standing out in the
open, attacking someone, making a bunch of noise, and
so forth. If you Strike someone after successfully Hiding
or Sneaking, though, they’re flat-footed to that Strike.
Creatures can try to find you using the Seek action,
described on page 471.
Three conditions explain the states of detection.
Remember that these conditions are relative to each
creature—you can be observed by one creature while
hidden to another and undetected by a third.
OBSERVED
You’re in the creature’s clear view.
HIDDEN
The creature knows your location but can’t see you.
UNDETECTED
The creature doesn’t know your location.
HIDE [one-action]
SECRET
You huddle behind cover or greater cover or deeper into
concealment to become hidden, rather than observed. The
GM rolls your Stealth check in secret and compares the
result to the Perception DC of each creature you’re observed
by but that you have cover or greater cover against or are
concealed from. You gain the circumstance bonus from cover
or greater cover to your check.
Success If the creature could see you, you’re now hidden
from it instead of observed. If you were hidden from or
undetected by the creature, you retain that condition.
If you successfully become hidden to a creature but
then cease to have cover or greater cover against it or be
concealed from it, you become observed again. You cease
being hidden if you do anything except Hide, Sneak, or Step.
Skills 4
251
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
If you attempt to Strike a creature, the creature remains flatfooted against that attack, and you then become observed. If
you do anything else, you become observed just before you
act unless the GM determines otherwise. The GM might allow
you to perform a particularly unobtrusive action without
being noticed, possibly requiring another Stealth check.
If a creature uses Seek to make you observed by it, you
must successfully Hide to become hidden from it again.
SNEAK [one-action]
MOVE SECRET
You can attempt to move to another place while becoming
or staying undetected. Stride up to half your Speed. (You can
use Sneak while Burrowing, Climbing, Flying, or Swimming
instead of Striding if you have the corresponding movement
type; you must move at half that Speed.)
If you’re undetected by a creature and it’s impossible for that
creature to observe you (for a typical creature, this includes
when you’re invisible, the observer is blinded, or you’re in
darkness and the creature can’t see in darkness), for any critical
failure you roll on a check to Sneak, you get a failure instead.
You also continue to be undetected if you lose cover or greater
cover against or are no longer concealed from such a creature.
At the end of your movement, the GM rolls your Stealth
check in secret and compares the result to the Perception
DC of each creature you were hidden from or undetected by
at the start of your movement. If you have cover or greater
cover from the creature throughout your Stride, you gain the
+2 circumstance bonus from cover (or +4 from greater cover)
to your Stealth check. Because you’re moving, the bonus
increase from Taking Cover doesn’t apply. You don’t get to roll
against a creature if, at the end of your movement, you neither
are concealed from it nor have cover or greater cover against
it. You automatically become observed by such a creature.
Success You’re undetected by the creature during your movement
and remain undetected by the creature at the end of it.
You become observed as soon as you do anything other
than Hide, Sneak, or Step. If you attempt to Strike a creature,
the creature remains flat-footed against that attack, and you
then become observed. If you do anything else, you become
observed just before you act unless the GM determines
otherwise. The GM might allow you to perform a particularly
unobtrusive action without being noticed, possibly requiring
another Stealth check. If you speak or make a deliberate
loud noise, you become hidden instead of undetected.
If a creature uses Seek and you become hidden to it as a
result, you must Sneak if you want to become undetected
by that creature again.
Failure A telltale sound or other sign gives your position away,
though you still remain unseen. You’re hidden from the
creature throughout your movement and remain so.
Critical Failure You’re spotted! You’re observed by the creature
throughout your movement and remain so. If you’re
invisible and were hidden from the creature, instead of
being observed you’re hidden throughout your movement
and remain so.
Survival (Wis)
You are adept at living in the wilderness, foraging for
food and building shelter, and with training you discover
the secrets of tracking and hiding your trail. Even if you’re
untrained, you can still use Survival to Subsist (page 240).
• Subsist in the wild by foraging for food and
building shelter.
SENSE DIRECTION
EXPLORATION SECRET
Using the stars, the position of the sun, traits of the
geography or flora, or the behavior of fauna, you can stay
oriented in the wild. Typically, you attempt a Survival check
only once per day, but some environments or changes might
necessitate rolling more often. The GM determines the DC
and how long this activity takes (usually just a minute or so).
More unusual locales or those you’re unfamiliar with might
require you to have a minimum proficiency rank to Sense
Direction. Without a compass, you take a –2 item penalty to
checks to Sense Direction.
Critical Success You get an excellent sense of where you are.
If you are in an environment with cardinal directions, you
know them exactly.
Success You gain enough orientation to avoid becoming
hopelessly lost. If you are in an environment with cardinal
directions, you have a sense of those directions.
Sense Direction Tasks
Untrained determine a cardinal direction using the sun
Trained find an overgrown path in a forest
Expert navigate a hedge maze
Master navigate a byzantine labyrinth or relatively
featureless desert
Legendary navigate an ever-changing dream realm
Survival Trained Actions
COVER TRACKS
CONCENTRATE EXPLORATION MOVE
You cover your tracks, moving up to half your travel Speed,
using the rules on page 479). You don’t need to attempt a
Survival check to cover your tracks, but anyone tracking you
must succeed at a Survival check against your Survival DC if it
is higher than the normal DC to Track.
In some cases, you might Cover Tracks in an encounter. In
this case, Cover Tracks is a single action and doesn’t have the
exploration trait.
TRACK
CONCENTRATE EXPLORATION MOVE
You follow tracks, moving at up to half your travel Speed, using
the rules on page 479). After a successful check to Track, you
can continue following the tracks at half your Speed without
attempting additional checks for up to 1 hour. In some cases,
you might Track in an encounter. In this case, Track is a single
action and doesn’t have the exploration trait, but you might
Core Rulebook
252
need to roll more often because you’re in a tense situation.
The GM determines how often you must attempt this check.
You attempt your Survival check when you start Tracking,
once every hour you continue tracking, and any time
something significant changes in the trail. The GM determines
the DCs for such checks, depending on the freshness of the
trail, the weather, and the type of ground.
Success You find the trail or continue to follow the one you’re
already following.
Failure You lose the trail but can try again after a 1-hour delay.
Critical Failure You lose the trail and can’t try again for 24 hours.
Sample Track Tasks
Untrained the path of a large army following a road
Trained relatively fresh tracks of a rampaging bear
through the plains
Expert a nimble panther’s tracks through a jungle, tracks
after the rain
Master tracks after a winter snow, tracks of a mouse or
smaller creature, tracks left on surfaces that can’t hold
prints like bare rock
Legendary old tracks through a windy desert’s sands,
tracks after a major blizzard or hurricane
Thievery (Dex)
You are trained in a particular set of skills favored by
thieves and miscreants.
PALM AN OBJECT [one-action]
MANIPULATE
Palming a small, unattended object without being noticed
requires you to roll a single Thievery check against the
Perception DCs of all creatures who are currently observing
you. You take the object whether or not you successfully
conceal that you did so. You can typically only Palm Objects
of negligible Bulk, though the GM might determine otherwise
depending on the situation.
Success The creature does not notice you Palming the Object.
Failure The creature notices you Palming the Object, and the
GM determines the creature’s response.
STEAL [one-action]
MANIPULATE
You try to take a small object from another creature without
being noticed. Typically, you can Steal only an object of
negligible Bulk, and you automatically fail if the creature who
has the object is in combat or on guard.
Attempt a Thievery check to determine if you successfully
Steal the object. The DC to Steal is usually the Perception DC
of the creature wearing the object. This assumes the object
is worn but not closely guarded (like a loosely carried pouch
filled with coins, or an object within such a pouch). If the object
is in a pocket or similarly protected, you take a –5 penalty to
your Thievery check. The GM might increase the DC of your
check if the nature of the object makes it harder to steal (such
as a very small item in a large pack, or a sheet of parchment
mixed in with other documents).
You might also need to compare your Thievery check result
against the Perception DCs of observers other than the person
wearing the object. The GM may increase the Perception DCs
of these observers if they’re distracted.
Success You steal the item without the bearer noticing, or an
observer doesn’t see you take or attempt to take the item.
Failure The item’s bearer notices your attempt before you can
take the object, or an observer sees you take or attempt
to take the item. The GM determines the response of any
creature that notices your theft.
Thievery Trained Actions
DISABLE A DEVICE [two-actions]
MANIPULATE
Requirements Some devices require you to use thieves’ tools
(page 291) when disabling them.
This action allows you to disarm a trap or another complex
device. Often, a device requires numerous successes before
becoming disabled, depending on its construction and
complexity. Thieves’ tools are helpful and sometimes even
required to Disable a Device, as determined by the GM, and
sometimes a device requires a higher proficiency rank in
Thievery to disable it.
Your Thievery check result determines how much progress
you make.
Critical Success You disable the device, or you achieve two
successes toward disabling a complex device. You leave no
trace of your tampering, and you can rearm the device later,
if that type of device can be rearmed.
Success You disable the device, or you achieve one success
toward disabling a complex device.
Critical Failure You trigger the device.
PICK A LOCK [two-actions]
MANIPULATE
Requirements You have thieves’ tools (page 291).
Opening a lock without a key is very similar to Disabling a
Device, but the DC of the check is determined by the complexity
and construction of the lock you are attempting to pick (locks
and their DCs are found on page 290). Locks of higher qualities
might require multiple successes to unlock, since otherwise even
an unskilled burglar could easily crack the lock by attempting
the check until they rolled a natural 20. If you lack the proper
tools, the GM might let you used improvised picks, which are
treated as shoddy tools, depending on the specifics of the lock.
Critical Success You unlock the lock, or you achieve two
successes toward opening a complex lock. You leave no
trace of your tampering.
Success You open the lock, or you achieve one success toward
opening a complex lock.
Critical Failure You break your tools. Fixing them requires using
Crafting to Repair them or else swapping in replacement
picks (costing 3 sp, or 3 gp for infiltrator thieves’ tools).
Skills 4
253
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Core Rulebook
254
TABLE 5–1: GENERAL FEATS
Non-Skill Feats Level Prerequisites Benefits
Adopted Ancestry 1 — Gain access to ancestry feats from another ancestry
Armor Proficiency 1 — Become trained in a type of armor
Breath Control 1 — Hold your breath longer and gain benefits against inhaled threats
Canny Acumen 1 — Become an expert in a saving throw or Perception
Diehard 1 — Die at dying 5, rather than dying 4
Fast Recovery 1 Constitution 14 Regain more HP from rest, recover faster from disease and poisons
Feather Step 1 Dexterity 14 Step into difficult terrain
Fleet 1 — Increase your Speed by 5 feet
Incredible Initiative 1 — +2 to initiative rolls
Ride 1 — Automatically succeed at commanding your mount to move
Shield Block 1 — Ward off a blow with your shield
Toughness 1 — Increase your maximum HP and reduce the DCs of recovery checks
Weapon Proficiency 1 — Become trained in a weapon type
Ancestral Paragon 3 — Gain a 1st-level ancestry feat
Untrained Improvisation 3 — Become more adept at using untrained skills
Expeditious Search 7 Master Perception Search areas in half the time
Incredible Investiture 11 Charisma 16 Invest up to 12 magic items
TABLE 5–2: GENERAL SKILL FEATS
Varying Skill Feats Level Prerequisites Benefits
Assurance 1 Trained in at least one skill Receive a fixed result on a skill check
Dubious Knowledge 1 Trained in Recall Knowledge skill Learn true and erroneous knowledge on failed check
Quick Identification 1 Trained in Arcana, Nature, Occultism, Identify Magic in 1 minute or less
or Religion
Recognize Spell 1 Trained in Arcana, Nature, Occultism, Identify a spell as a reaction as it’s being cast
or Religion
Skill Training 1 Intelligence 12 Become trained in a skill
Trick Magic Item 1 Trained in Arcana, Nature, Occultism, Activate a magic item you normally can’t activate
or Religion
Automatic Knowledge 2 Expert in Recall Knowledge action, Recall Knowledge as a free action once per day
Assurance in the relevant skill
Magical Shorthand 2 Expert in Arcana, Nature, Occultism, Learn spells quickly and at a reduced cost
or Religion
Quick Recognition 7 Master in Arcana, Nature, Occultism, Identify spells as a free action
or Religion; Recognize Spell
Acrobatics Skill Feats Level Prerequisites Benefits
Cat Fall 1 Trained in Acrobatics Treat falls as shorter than they are
For most classes, you gain a general feat when you reach
3rd level and every 4 levels thereafter. Each time you gain
a general feat, you can select any feat with the general trait
whose prerequisites you satisfy.
General feats also include a subcategory of skill feats,
which expand on what you can accomplish via skills.
Chapter 5: Feats
All kinds of experiences and training can shape your character beyond what you learn by
advancing in your class. Abilities that require a degree of training but can be learned by
anyone—not only members of certain ancestries or classes—are called general feats.
These feats also have the skill trait. Most characters gain
skill feats at 2nd level and every 2 levels thereafter. When
you gain a skill feat, you must select a general feat with the
skill trait; you can’t select a general feat that lacks the skill
trait. The level of a skill feat is typically the minimum level
at which a character could meet its proficiency prerequisite.
5
255
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Quick Squeeze 1 Trained in Acrobatics Move swiftly as you Squeeze
Steady Balance 1 Trained in Acrobatics Maintain your balance in adverse conditions
Nimble Crawl 2 Expert in Acrobatics Crawl at a faster rate
Kip Up 7 Master in Acrobatics Stand up for free without triggering reactions
Arcana Skill Feats Level Prerequisites Benefits
Arcane Sense 1 Trained in Arcana Cast detect magic at will as an arcane innate spell
Unified Theory 15 Legendary in Arcana Use Arcana for checks for all magical traditions
Athletics Skill Feats Level Prerequisites Benefits
Combat Climber 1 Trained in Athletics Fight more effectively as you Climb
Hefty Hauler 1 Trained in Athletics Increase your Bulk limits by 2
Quick Jump 1 Trained in Athletics High Jump or Long Jump as a single action
Titan Wrestler 1 Trained in Athletics Disarm, Grapple, Shove, or Trip larger creatures
Underwater Marauder 1 Trained in Athletics Fight more effectively underwater
Powerful Leap 2 Expert in Athletics Jump farther and higher
Rapid Mantel 2 Expert in Athletics Pull yourself onto ledges quickly
Quick Climb 7 Master in Athletics Climb swiftly
Quick Swim 7 Master in Athletics Swim quickly
Wall Jump 7 Master in Athletics Jump off walls
Cloud Jump 15 Legendary in Athletics Jump impossible distances
Crafting Skill Feats Level Prerequisites Benefits
Alchemical Crafting 1 Trained in Crafting Craft alchemical items
Quick Repair 1 Trained in Crafting Repair items quickly
Snare Crafting 1 Trained in Crafting Craft snares
Specialty Crafting 1 Trained in Crafting Gain bonuses to Craft certain items
Magical Crafting 2 Expert in Crafting Craft magic items
Impeccable Crafting 7 Master in Crafting, Specialty Crafting Craft items more efficiently
Inventor 7 Master in Crafting Use Crafting to create item formulas
Craft Anything 15 Legendary in Crafting Ignore most requirements for crafting items
Deception Skill Feats Level Prerequisites Benefits
Charming Liar 1 Trained in Deception Improve a target’s attitude with your lies
Lengthy Diversion 1 Trained in Deception Remain hidden after you Create a Diversion
Lie to Me 1 Trained in Deception Use Deception to detect lies
Confabulator 2 Expert in Deception Reduce the bonuses against your repeated lies
Quick Disguise 2 Expert in Deception Set up a disguise in only half the time
Slippery Secrets 7 Master in Deception Evade attempts to uncover your true nature
Diplomacy Skill Feats Level Prerequisites Benefits
Bargain Hunter 1 Trained in Diplomacy Earn Income by searching for deals
Group Impression 1 Trained in Diplomacy Make an Impression on multiple targets at once
Hobnobber 1 Trained in Diplomacy Gather Information rapidly
Glad-Hand 2 Expert in Diplomacy Make an Impression on a target you’ve just met
Shameless Request 7 Master in Diplomacy Make Requests of others with lesser consequences
Legendary Negotiation 15 Legendary in Diplomacy Quickly parley with foes
Intimidation Skill Feats Level Prerequisites Benefits
Group Coercion 1 Trained in Intimidation Coerce multiple targets simultaneously
Intimidating Glare 1 Trained in Intimidation Demoralize a creature without speaking
Quick Coercion 1 Trained in Intimidation Coerce a creature quickly
Intimidating Prowess 2 Strength 16, expert in Intimidation Gain a bonus to physically Demoralize a target
Lasting Coercion 2 Expert in Intimidation Coerce a target into helping you longer
Battle Cry 7 Master in Intimidation Demoralizes foes when you roll for initiative
Terrified Retreat 7 Master in Intimidation Cause foes you Demoralize to flee
Scare to Death 15 Legendary in Intimidation Scare a target so much, they might die
Lore Skill Feats Level Prerequisites Benefits
Additional Lore 1 Trained in Lore Become trained in another Lore subcategory
Experienced Professional 1 Trained in Lore Prevent critical failures when Earning Income
Unmistakable Lore 2 Expert in Lore Recall Knowledge about your Lore more effectively
Legendary Professional 15 Legendary in Lore Gain renown for your Lore
Core Rulebook
256
Medicine Skill Feats Level Prerequisites Benefits
Battle Medicine 1 Trained in Medicine Heal yourself or an ally in battle
Continual Recovery 2 Expert in Medicine Treat Wounds on a patient more often
Robust Recovery 2 Expert in Medicine Greater benefits from Treat Disease and Treat Poison
Ward Medic 2 Expert in Medicine Treat several patients at once
Legendary Medic 15 Legendary in Medicine Remove disease or the blinded, deafened, doomed, or
 drained condition
Nature Skill Feats Level Prerequisites Benefits
Natural Medicine 1 Trained in Nature Use Nature to Treat Wounds
Train Animal 1 Trained in Nature Teach an animal a trick
Bonded Animal 2 Expert in Nature An animal becomes permanently helpful to you
Occultism Skill Feats Level Prerequisites Benefits
Oddity Identification 1 Trained in Occultism +2 to Occultism checks to Identify Magic with
 certain traits
Bizarre Magic 7 Master in Occultism Your magic becomes more difficult to identify
Performance Skill Feats Level Prerequisites Benefits
Fascinating Performance 1 Trained in Performance Perform to fascinate observers
Impressive Performance 1 Trained in Performance Make an Impression with Performance
Virtuosic Performer 1 Trained in Performance +1 with a certain type of performance
Legendary Performer 15 Legendary in Performance, Gain renown for your Performance
Virtuosic Performer
Religion Skill Feats Level Prerequisites Benefits
Student of the Canon 1 Trained in Religion More accurately recognize the tenets of your faith
 or philosophy
Divine Guidance 15 Legendary in Religion Find guidance in the writings of your faith
Society Skill Feats Level Prerequisites Benefits
Courtly Graces 1 Trained in Society Use Society to get along in noble society
Multilingual 1 Trained in Society Learn two new languages
Read Lips 1 Trained in Society Read the lips of people you can see
Sign Language 1 Trained in Society Learn sign languages
Streetwise 1 Trained in Society Use Society to Gather Information and Recall
 Knowledge
Connections 2 Expert in Society, Courtly Graces Leverage your connections for favors and meetings
Legendary Codebreaker 15 Legendary in Society Quickly Decipher Writing using Society
Legendary Linguist 15 Legendary in Society, Multilingual Create pidgin languages to communicate with anyone
Stealth Skill Feats Level Prerequisites Benefits
Experienced Smuggler 1 Trained in Stealth Conceal items from observers more effectively
Terrain Stalker 1 Trained in Stealth Sneak in certain terrain without attempting a check
Quiet Allies 2 Expert in Stealth Roll a single Stealth check when sneaking with allies
Foil Senses 7 Master in Stealth Take precautions against special senses
Swift Sneak 7 Master in Stealth Move your full Speed while you Sneak
Legendary Sneak 15 Legendary in Stealth, Swift Sneak Hide and Sneak without cover or being concealed
Survival Skill Feats Level Prerequisites Benefits
Experienced Tracker 1 Trained in Survival Track at your full Speed at a –5 penalty
Forager 1 Trained in Survival Forage for supplies to provide for multiple creatures
Survey Wildlife 1 Trained in Survival Identify nearby creatures through signs and clues
Terrain Expertise 1 Trained in Survival +1 to Survival checks in certain terrain
Planar Survival 7 Master in Survival Use Survival to Subsist on different planes
Legendary Survivalist 15 Legendary in Survival Survive extreme conditions
Thievery Skill Feats Level Prerequisites Benefits
Pickpocket 1 Trained in Thievery Steal or Palm an Object more effectively
Subtle Theft 1 Trained in Thievery Your thefts are harder to notice
Wary Disarmament 2 Expert in Thievery +2 to AC or saves against devices or traps you trigger
 while disarming
Quick Unlock 7 Master in Thievery Pick a Lock with 1 action
Legendary Thief 15 Legendary in Thievery, Pickpocket Steal what would normally be impossible to steal
FEATS 5
257
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
ADDITIONAL LORE FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Lore
Your knowledge has expanded to encompass a new field. Choose
an additional Lore skill subcategory. You become trained in it. At
3rd, 7th, and 15th levels, you gain an additional skill increase
you can apply only to the chosen Lore subcategory.
Special You can select this feat more than once. Each time
you must select a new subcategory of Lore and you gain the
additional skill increases to that subcategory for the listed levels.
ADOPTED ANCESTRY FEAT 1
GENERAL
You’re fully immersed in another ancestry’s culture and
traditions, whether born into them, earned through rite of
passage, or bonded through a deep friendship or romance.
Choose a common ancestry. You can select ancestry feats
from the ancestry you chose, in addition to your character’s
own ancestry, as long as the ancestry feats don’t require any
physiological feature that you lack, as determined by the GM.
ALCHEMICAL CRAFTING FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Crafting
You can use the Craft activity to create alchemical items. When
you select this feat, you immediately add the formulas for four
common 1st-level alchemical items to your formula book.
ANCESTRAL PARAGON FEAT 3
GENERAL
Whether through instinct, study, or magic, you feel a deeper
connection to your ancestry. You gain a 1st-level ancestry feat.
ARCANE SENSE FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Arcana
Your study of magic allows you to instinctively sense its
presence. You can cast 1st-level detect magic at will as an arcane
innate spell. If you’re a master in Arcana, the spell is heightened
to 3rd level; if you’re legendary, it is heightened to 4th level.
ARMOR PROFICIENCY FEAT 1
GENERAL
You become trained in light armor. If you already were trained
in light armor, you gain training in medium armor. If you were
trained in both, you become trained in heavy armor.
Special You can select this feat more than once. Each time,
you become trained in the next type of armor above.
ASSURANCE FEAT 1
FORTUNE GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in at least one skill
Even in the worst circumstances, you can perform basic tasks.
Choose a skill you’re trained in. You can forgo rolling a skill check
for that skill to instead receive a result of 10 + your proficiency
bonus (do not apply any other bonuses, penalties, or modifiers).
Special You can select this feat multiple times. Each time,
choose a different skill and gain the benefits for that skill.
AUTOMATIC KNOWLEDGE FEAT 2
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites expert in a skill with the Recall Knowledge
action, Assurance in that skill
You know basic facts off the top of your head. Choose a skill
you’re an expert in that has the Recall Knowledge action and
for which you have the Assurance feat. You can use the Recall
Knowledge action with that skill as a free action once per round.
If you do, you must use Assurance on the skill check.
Special You can select this feat multiple times, choosing a
different skill each time. You can use Automatic Knowledge
with any skills you have chosen, but you can still use Automatic
Knowledge only once per round.
BARGAIN HUNTER FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Diplomacy
You can Earn Income (page 236) using Diplomacy, spending
your days hunting for bargains and reselling at a profit. You
can also spend time specifically sniffing out a great bargain
on an item; this works as if you were using Earn Income with
Diplomacy, except instead of gaining money, you purchase
the item at a discount equal to the money you would have
gained, gaining the item for free if your earned income equals
or exceeds its cost. Finally, if you select Bargain Hunter
during character creation at 1st level, you start play with an
additional 2 gp.
BATTLE CRY FEAT 7
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites master in Intimidation
When you roll initiative, you can yell a mighty battle cry and
Demoralize an observed foe as a free action. If you’re legendary
in Intimidation, you can use a reaction to Demoralize your foe
when you critically succeed at an attack roll.
BATTLE MEDICINE [one-action] FEAT 1
GENERAL HEALING MANIPULATE SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Medicine
You can patch up yourself or an adjacent ally, even in combat.
Attempt a Medicine check with the same DC as for Treat
Wounds and provide the corresponding amount of healing.
As with Treat Wounds, you can attempt checks against
higher DCs if you have the minimum proficiency rank. The
target is then temporarily immune to your Battle Medicine
for 1 day.
BIZARRE MAGIC FEAT 7
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites master in Occultism
You can draw upon strange variations in your spellcasting,
whether or not you can cast occult spells. The DCs to Recognize
Spells you cast and Identify Magic you use increase by 5.
Core Rulebook
258
BONDED ANIMAL FEAT 2
DOWNTIME GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites expert in Nature
You forge strong connections with animals. You can spend 7
days of downtime trying to bond with a normal animal (not
a companion or other special animal). After this duration,
attempt a DC 20 Nature check. If successful, you bond with
the animal. The animal is permanently helpful to you, unless
you do something egregious to break your bond. A helpful
animal is easier to direct, as described under Command an
Animal on page 249.
Bonding with a new animal ends any previous bond you had.
You can’t have both a bonded animal and an animal companion
(though you can have both a bonded animal and a familiar).
BREATH CONTROL FEAT 1
GENERAL
You have incredible breath control, which grants you
advantages when air is hazardous or sparse. You can hold your
breath for 25 times as long as usual before suffocating. You
gain a +1 circumstance bonus to saving throws against inhaled
threats, such as inhaled poisons, and if you roll a success on
such a saving throw, you get a critical success instead.
CANNY ACUMEN FEAT 1
GENERAL
Your avoidance or observation is beyond the ken of most in
your profession. Choose Fortitude saves, Reflex saves, Will
saves, or Perception. You become an expert in your choice. At
17th level, you become a master in your choice.
CAT FALL FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Acrobatics
Your catlike aerial acrobatics allow you to cushion your
falls. Treat falls as 10 feet shorter. If you’re an expert in
Acrobatics, treat falls as 25 feet shorter. If you’re a master in
Acrobatics, treat them as 50 feet shorter. If you’re legendary
in Acrobatics, you always land on your feet and don’t take
damage, regardless of the distance of the fall.
CHARMING LIAR FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Deception
Your charm allows you to win over those you lie to. When
you get a critical success using the Lie action, the target’s
attitude toward you improves by one step, as though you’d
succeeded at using Diplomacy to Make an Impression. This
works only once per conversation, and if you critically
succeed against multiple targets using the same result, you
choose one creature’s attitude to improve. You must be lying
to impart seemingly important information, inflate your
status, or ingratiate yourself, which trivial or irrelevant lies
can’t achieve.
FEATS 5
259
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Impersonate to pretend to be a noble if you aren’t one. If you
want to impersonate a specific noble, you still need to use
Deception to Impersonate normally, and to Lie when necessary.
CRAFT ANYTHING FEAT 15
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites legendary in Crafting
You can find ways to craft just about anything, despite
restrictions. As long as you have the appropriate Crafting skill
feat (such as Magical Crafting for magic items) and meet the
item’s level and proficiency requirement, you ignore just about
any other requirement, such as being of a specific ancestry or
providing spells. The only exceptions are requirements that add
to the item’s cost, including castings of spells that themselves
have a cost, and requirements of special items such as the
philosopher’s stone that have exclusive means of access and
Crafting. The GM decides whether you can ignore a requirement.
DIEHARD FEAT 1
GENERAL
It takes more to kill you than most. You die from the dying
condition at dying 5, rather than dying 4.
DIVINE GUIDANCE FEAT 15
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites legendary in Religion
You’re so immersed in divine scripture that you find meaning
and guidance in your texts in any situation. Spend 10 minutes
Deciphering Writing on religious scriptures of your deity
or philosophy while thinking about a particular problem or
conundrum you face, and then attempt a Religion check (DC
determined by the GM). If you succeed, you unearth a relevant
passage, parable, or aphorism that can help you move forward
or change your thinking to help solve your conundrum. For
example, the GM might provide you with a cryptic poem or hint
that can guide you to the next step of solving your problem.
DUBIOUS KNOWLEDGE FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in a skill with the Recall Knowledge action
You’re a treasure trove of information, but not all of it comes
from reputable sources. When you fail a Recall Knowledge
check using any skill, you learn a bit of true knowledge and
a bit of erroneous knowledge, but you don’t have any way to
differentiate which is which.
EXPEDITIOUS SEARCH FEAT 7
GENERAL
Prerequisites master in Perception
You have a system that lets you search at great speed, finding
details and secrets twice as quickly as others can. When
Searching, you take half as long as usual to Search a given
area. This means that while exploring, you double the Speed
you can move while ensuring you’ve Searched an area before
walking into it (up to half your Speed). If you’re legendary in
Perception, you instead Search areas four times as quickly.
CLOUD JUMP FEAT 15
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites legendary in Athletics
Your unparalleled athletic skill allows you to jump impossible
distances. Triple the distance you Long Jump (so you could jump
60 feet on a successful DC 20 check). When you High Jump, use
the calculation for a Long Jump but don’t triple the distance.
When you Long Jump or High Jump, you can also increase
the number of actions you use (up to the number of actions you
have remaining in your turn) to jump even further. For each extra
action, add your Speed to the maximum distance you jump.
COMBAT CLIMBER FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Athletics
Your techniques allow you to fight as you climb. You’re not
flat-footed while Climbing and can Climb with a hand occupied.
You must still use another hand and both legs to Climb.
CONFABULATOR FEAT 2
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites expert in Deception
Even when caught in falsehoods, you pile lie upon lie. Reduce the
circumstance bonus a target gains for your previous attempts
to Create a Diversion or Lie to it from +4 to +2. If you’re a master
in Deception, reduce the bonus to +1, and if you’re legendary,
your targets don’t get these bonuses at all.
CONNECTIONS FEAT 2
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites expert in Society, Courtly Graces
You have social connections you can leverage to trade favors or
meet important people. When you’re in an area with connections
(typically a settlement where you’ve spent downtime building
connections, or possibly another area in the same nation), you
can attempt a Society check to arrange a meeting with an
important political figure or ask for a favor in exchange for a
later favor of your contact’s choice. The GM decides the DC
based on the difficulty of the favor and the figure’s prominence.
CONTINUAL RECOVERY FEAT 2
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites expert in Medicine
You zealously monitor a patient’s progress to administer
treatment faster. When you Treat Wounds, your patient
becomes immune for only 10 minutes instead of 1 hour. This
applies only to your Treat Wounds activities, not any other the
patient receives.
COURTLY GRACES FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Society
You were raised among the nobility or have learned proper
etiquette and bearing, allowing you to present yourself as a
noble and play games of influence and politics. You can use
Society to Make an Impression on a noble, as well as with
Core Rulebook
260
EXPERIENCED PROFESSIONAL FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Lore
You carefully safeguard your professional endeavors to prevent
disaster. When you use Lore to Earn Income, if you roll a critical
failure, you instead get a failure. If you’re an expert in Lore, you
gain twice as much income from a failed check to Earn Income,
unless it was originally a critical failure.
EXPERIENCED SMUGGLER FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Stealth
You often smuggle things past the authorities. When the GM
rolls your Stealth check to see if a passive observer notices a
small item you have concealed, the GM uses the number rolled
or 10—whichever is higher—as the result of your die roll, adding it
to your Stealth modifier to determine your Stealth check result.
If you’re a master in Stealth, the GM uses the number rolled or
15, and if you’re legendary in Stealth, you automatically succeed
at hiding a small concealed item from passive observers. This
provides no benefits when a creature attempts a Perception
check while actively searching you for hidden items. Due to
your smuggling skill, you’re more likely to find more lucrative
smuggling jobs when using Underworld Lore to Earn Income.
EXPERIENCED TRACKER FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Survival
Tracking is second nature to you, and when necessary you
can follow a trail without pause. You can Track while moving
at full Speed by taking a –5 penalty to your Survival check.
If you’re a master in Survival, you don’t take the –5 penalty.
If you’re legendary in Survival, you no longer need to roll a
new Survival check every hour when tracking, though you still
need to roll whenever there are significant changes in the trail.
FASCINATING PERFORMANCE FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Performance
When you Perform, compare your result to the Will DC of one
observer. If you succeed, the target is fascinated by you for 1
round. If the observer is in a situation that demands immediate
attention, such as combat, you must critically succeed to fascinate
it and the Perform action gains the incapacitation trait. You must
choose which creature you’re trying to fascinate before you roll
your check, and the target is then temporarily immune for 1 hour.
If you’re an expert in Performance, you can fascinate up
to four observers; if you’re a master, you can fascinate up to
10 observers; and if you’re legendary, you can fascinate any
number of observers at the same time.
FAST RECOVERY FEAT 1
GENERAL
Prerequisites Constitution 14
Your body quickly bounces back from afflictions. You regain
twice as many Hit Points from resting. Each time you succeed
at a Fortitude save against an ongoing disease or poison, you
reduce its stage by 2, or by 1 against a virulent disease or poison.
Each critical success you achieve against an ongoing disease or
poison reduces its stage by 3, or by 2 against a virulent disease
or poison. In addition, you reduce the severity of your drained
condition by 2 when you rest for a night instead of by 1.
FEATHER STEP FEAT 1
GENERAL
Prerequisites Dexterity 14
You step carefully and quickly. You can Step into difficult terrain.
FLEET FEAT 1
GENERAL
You move more quickly on foot. Your Speed increases by 5 feet.
FOIL SENSES FEAT 7
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites master in Stealth
You are adept at foiling creatures’ special senses and cautious
enough to safeguard against them at all times. Whenever you
use the Avoid Notice, Hide, or Sneak actions, you are always
considered to be taking precautions against special senses
(see the Detecting with Other Senses sidebar on page 465).
FORAGER FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Survival
While using Survival to Subsist, if you roll any result worse than
a success, you get a success. On a success, you can provide
subsistence living for yourself and four additional creatures,
and on a critical success, you can take care of twice as many
creatures as on a success.
Each time your proficiency rank in Survival increases, double
the number of additional creatures you can take care of on a
success (to eight if you’re an expert, 16 if you’re a master, or 32
if you’re legendary). You can choose to care for half the number
of additional creatures and provide a comfortable living instead
of subsistence living.
Multiple smaller creatures or creatures with significantly
smaller appetites than a human are counted as a single creature
for this feat, and larger creatures or those with significantly
greater appetites each count as multiple creatures. The GM
determines how much a non-human creature needs to eat.
GLAD-HAND FEAT 2
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites expert in Diplomacy
First impressions are your strong suit. When you meet
someone in a casual or social situation, you can immediately
attempt a Diplomacy check to Make an Impression on that
creature rather than needing to converse for 1 minute. You
take a –5 penalty to the check. If you fail or critically fail, you
can engage in 1 minute of conversation and attempt a new
check at the end of that time rather than accepting the failure
or critical failure result.
FEATS 5
261
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
You have an incredible ability to invest more magic items.
Increase your limit on invested items from 10 to 12.
INTIMIDATING GLARE FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Intimidation
You can Demoralize with a mere glare. When you do, Demoralize
loses the auditory trait and gains the visual trait, and you don’t
take a penalty if the creature doesn’t understand your language.
INTIMIDATING PROWESS FEAT 2
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites Strength 16, expert in Intimidation
In situations where you can physically menace the target when
you Coerce or Demoralize, you gain a +1 circumstance bonus
to your Intimidation check and you ignore the penalty for not
sharing a language. If your Strength score is 20 or higher and
you are a master in Intimidation, this bonus increases to +2.
INVENTOR FEAT 7
DOWNTIME GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites master in Crafting
You are a genius at Crafting, easily able to determine how things
are made and create new inventions. You can spend downtime
to invent a common formula that you don’t know. This works
just like the Craft activity: you spend half the Price of the
formula up front, attempt a Crafting check, and on a success
either finish the formula by paying the difference or work for
longer to decrease the Price. The difference is that you spend
the additional time in research, design, and development, rather
than in creating an item. Once it’s complete, you add the new
formula you invented to your formula book.
KIP UP [free-action] FEAT 7
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites master in Acrobatics
You stand up. This movement doesn’t trigger reactions.
LASTING COERCION FEAT 2
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites expert in Intimidation
When you successfully Coerce someone, the maximum time
they comply increases to a week, still determined by the GM.
If you’re legendary, the maximum increases to a month.
LEGENDARY CODEBREAKER FEAT 15
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites legendary in Society
Your skill with languages and codes is so great that you
can decipher information with little more than a quick read
through a text. You can Decipher Writing using Society
while reading at normal speed. If you slow down and spend
the full amount of time that’s ordinarily required and roll a
success, you get a critical success; if you critically succeed
while spending the normal amount of time, you gain a nearly
word-for-word understanding of the document.
GROUP COERCION FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Intimidation
When you Coerce, you can compare your Intimidation check
result to the Will DCs of two targets instead of one. It’s possible
to get a different degree of success for each target. The number
of targets you can Coerce in a single action increases to four if
you’re an expert, 10 if you’re a master, and 25 if you’re legendary.
GROUP IMPRESSION FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Diplomacy
When you Make an Impression, you can compare your
Diplomacy check result to the Will DCs of two targets instead
of one. It’s possible to get a different degree of success for
each target. The number of targets increases to four if you’re
an expert, 10 if you’re a master, and 25 if you’re legendary.
HEFTY HAULER FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Athletics
You can carry more than your frame implies. Increase your
maximum and encumbered Bulk limits by 2.
HOBNOBBER FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Diplomacy
You are skilled at learning information through conversation.
The Gather Information exploration activity takes you half as
long as normal (typically reducing the time to 1 hour). If you’re a
master in Diplomacy and you Gather Information at the normal
speed, when you attempt to do so and roll a critical failure, you
get a failure instead. There is still no guarantee that a rumor you
learn with Gather Information is accurate.
IMPECCABLE CRAFTING FEAT 7
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites master in Crafting, Specialty Crafting
You craft flawless creations with great efficiency. Whenever you
roll a success at a Crafting check to make an item of the type you
chose with Specialty Crafting, you get a critical success instead.
IMPRESSIVE PERFORMANCE FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Performance
Your performances inspire admiration and win you fans. You can
Make an Impression using Performance instead of Diplomacy.
INCREDIBLE INITIATIVE FEAT 1
GENERAL
You react more quickly than others can. You gain a +2
circumstance bonus to initiative rolls.
INCREDIBLE INVESTITURE FEAT 11
GENERAL
Prerequisites Charisma 16
Core Rulebook
262
LEGENDARY LINGUIST FEAT 15
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites legendary in Society, Multilingual
You’re so skilled with languages you can create a pidgin instantly.
You can always talk to any creature that has a language—even a
language you don’t know—by creating a new pidgin language that
uses simplified terms and conveys basic concepts. To do so, you
must first understand at least what medium of communication
the creature uses (speech, sign language, and so on).
LEGENDARY MEDIC FEAT 15
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites legendary in Medicine
You’ve discovered medical breakthroughs or techniques that
achieve miraculous results. Once per day for each target, you can
spend 1 hour treating that target and attempt a Medicine check
to remove a disease or the blinded, deafened, doomed, or drained
condition. Use the DC of the disease or of the spell or effect that
created the condition. If the effect’s source is an artifact, above
20th level, or similarly powerful, increase the DC by 10.
LEGENDARY NEGOTIATION [three-actions] FEAT 15
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites legendary in Diplomacy
You can negotiate incredibly quickly in adverse situations. You
attempt to Make an Impression and then Request your opponent
cease their current activity and engage in negotiations. You
take a –5 penalty to your Diplomacy check. The GM sets the
DC of the Request based on the circumstances—it’s generally
at least a very hard DC of the creature’s level. Some creatures
might simply refuse, and even those who agree to parley might
ultimately find your arguments lacking and return to violence.
LEGENDARY PERFORMER FEAT 15
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites legendary in Performance, Virtuosic Performer
Your fame has spread throughout the lands. NPCs who succeed
at a DC 10 Society check to Recall Knowledge have heard of you
and usually have an attitude toward you one step better than
normal, depending on your reputation and the NPC’s disposition.
For instance, if you’re well-known for cruel and demanding
behavior, creatures might be intimidated by you, rather than be
friendly toward you. When you Earn Income with Performance,
you attract higher-level audiences than your location would
allow, as audiences flock to see you. For instance, rulers and
angels might travel to your small tower in the woods to hear
you perform. Typically, this increases the audiences available by
2 levels or more, determined by the GM.
LEGENDARY PROFESSIONAL FEAT 15
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites legendary in Lore
Your fame has spread throughout the lands (for instance, if
you have Warfare Lore, you might be a legendary general or
tactician). This works as Legendary Performer above, except
you gain higher-level jobs when you Earn Income with Lore.
LEGENDARY SNEAK FEAT 15
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites legendary in Stealth, Swift Sneak
You’re always sneaking unless you choose to be seen, even
when there’s nowhere to hide. You can Hide and Sneak even
without cover or being concealed. When you employ an
exploration tactic other than Avoiding Notice, you also gain
the benefits of Avoiding Notice unless you choose not to. See
page 479 for more information about exploration tactics.
LEGENDARY SURVIVALIST FEAT 15
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites legendary in Survival
You can survive indefinitely without food or water and can
endure severe, extreme, and incredible cold and heat without
taking damage from doing so.
LEGENDARY THIEF FEAT 15
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites legendary in Thievery, Pickpocket
Your ability to Steal defies belief. You can attempt to Steal
something that is actively wielded or that would be extremely
noticeable or time consuming to remove (like worn shoes or
armor). You must do so slowly and carefully, spending at least 1
minute (and significantly longer for items that are normally time
consuming to remove, like armor). Throughout this duration you
must have some means of staying hidden, such as the cover of
darkness or a bustling crowd. You take a –5 penalty to your
Thievery check. Even if you succeed, if the item is extremely
prominent—like a suit of full plate armor—onlookers will quickly
notice it’s gone after you steal it.
LENGTHY DIVERSION FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Deception
When you critically succeed to Create a Diversion, you continue
to remain hidden after the end of your turn. This effect lasts for
an amount of time that depends on the diversion and situation,
as determined by the GM (minimum 1 additional round).
LIE TO ME FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Deception
You can use Deception to weave traps to trip up anyone trying
to deceive you. If you can engage in conversation with someone
trying to Lie to you, use your Deception DC if it is higher than
your Perception DC to determine whether they succeed. This
doesn’t apply if you don’t have a back-and-forth dialogue, such
as when someone attempts to Lie during a long speech.
MAGICAL CRAFTING FEAT 2
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites expert in Crafting
You can Craft magic items, though some have other requirements,
as listed in Chapter 11. When you select this feat, you gain
formulas for four common magic items of 2nd level or lower.
FEATS 5
263
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
MAGICAL SHORTHAND FEAT 2
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites expert in Arcana, Nature, Occultism, or Religion
Learning spells comes easily to you. If you’re an expert in a
tradition’s associated skill, you take 10 minutes per spell level to
learn a spell of that tradition, rather than 1 hour per spell level. If
you fail to learn the spell, you can try again after 1 week or after
you gain a level, whichever comes first. If you’re a master in the
tradition’s associated skill, learning a spell takes 5 minutes per
spell level, and if you’re legendary, it takes 1 minute per spell level.
You can use downtime to learn and inscribe new spells. This works
as if you were using Earn Income with the tradition’s associated
skill, but instead of gaining money, you choose a spell available to
you to learn and gain a discount on learning it, learning it for free
if your earned income equals or exceeds its cost.
MULTILINGUAL FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Society
You easily pick up new languages. You learn two new languages,
chosen from common languages, uncommon languages, and
any others you have access to. You learn an additional language
if you are or become a master in Society and again if you are or
become legendary.
Special You can select this feat multiple times. Each time,
you learn additional languages.
NATURAL MEDICINE FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Nature
You can apply natural cures to heal your allies. You can use
Nature instead of Medicine to Treat Wounds. If you’re in the
wilderness, you might have easier access to fresh ingredients,
allowing you to gain a +2 circumstance bonus to your check to
Treat Wounds using Nature, subject to the GM’s determination.
NIMBLE CRAWL FEAT 2
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites expert in Acrobatics
You can Crawl incredibly swiftly—up to half your Speed, rather
than 5 feet. If you’re a master in Acrobatics, you can Crawl at full
Speed, and if you’re legendary, you aren’t flat-footed while prone.
ODDITY IDENTIFICATION FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Occultism
You have a sense for spells that twist minds or reveal secrets. You
gain a +2 circumstance bonus to Occultism checks to Identify
Magic with the mental, possession, prediction, or scrying traits.
PICKPOCKET FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Thievery
You can Steal or Palm an Object that’s closely guarded, such as
in a pocket, without taking the –5 penalty. You can’t steal objects
that would be extremely noticeable or time consuming to remove
(like worn shoes or armor or actively wielded objects). If you’re a
master in Thievery, you can attempt to Steal from a creature in
combat or otherwise on guard. When doing so, Stealing requires
2 manipulate actions instead of 1, and you take a –5 penalty.
PLANAR SURVIVAL FEAT 7
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites master in Survival
You can Subsist using Survival on different planes, even those
without resources or natural phenomena you normally need.
For instance, you can forage for food even if the plane lacks
food that could normally sustain you. A success on your check
to Subsist can also reduce the damage dealt by the plane, at the
GM’s discretion.
POWERFUL LEAP FEAT 2
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites expert in Athletics
When you Leap, you can jump 5 feet up with a vertical Leap, and
you increase the distance you can jump horizontally by 5 feet.
QUICK CLIMB FEAT 7
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites master in Athletics
When Climbing, you move 5 more feet on a success and 10 more
feet on a critical success, to a maximum of your Speed.
If you’re legendary in Athletics, you gain a climb Speed
equal to your Speed.
QUICK COERCION FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Intimidation
You can bully others with just a few choice implications. You
can Coerce a creature after 1 round of conversation instead
of 1 minute. You still can’t Coerce a creature in the midst of
combat, or without engaging in a conversation.
QUICK DISGUISE FEAT 2
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites expert in Deception
You can set up a disguise in half the usual time (generally 5
minutes). If you’re a master, it takes one-tenth the usual time
(usually 1 minute). If you’re legendary, you can create a full
disguise and Impersonate as a 3-action activity.
QUICK IDENTIFICATION FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Arcana, Nature, Occultism or Religion
You can Identify Magic swiftly. You take only 1 minute when using
Identify Magic to determine the properties of an item, ongoing
effect, or location, rather than 10 minutes. If you’re a master, it
takes a 3-action activity, and if you’re legendary, it takes 1 action.
QUICK JUMP FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Athletics
Core Rulebook
264
You can use High Jump and Long Jump as a single action
instead of 2 actions. If you do, you don’t perform the initial
Stride (nor do you fail if you don’t Stride 10 feet).
QUICK RECOGNITION FEAT 7
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites master in Arcana, Nature, Occultism, or Religion;
Recognize Spell
You Recognize Spells swiftly. Once per round, you can Recognize
a Spell using a skill in which you’re a master as a free action.
QUICK REPAIR FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Crafting
You take 1 minute to Repair an item. If you’re a master in
Crafting, it takes 3 actions. If you’re legendary, it takes 1 action.
QUICK SQUEEZE FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Acrobatics
You Squeeze 5 feet per round (10 feet on a critical success).
If you’re legendary in Acrobatics, you Squeeze at full Speed.
QUICK SWIM FEAT 7
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites master in Athletics
You Swim 5 feet farther on a success and 10 feet farther on a
critical success, to a maximum of your Speed. If you’re legendary
in Athletics, you gain a swim Speed equal to your Speed.
QUICK UNLOCK FEAT 7
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites master in Thievery
You can Pick a Lock using 1 action instead of 2.
QUIET ALLIES FEAT 2
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites expert in Stealth
You’re skilled at moving with a group. When you are Avoiding
Notice and your allies Follow the Expert, you and those allies can
roll a single Stealth check, using the lowest modifier, instead of
rolling separately. This doesn’t apply for initiative rolls.
RAPID MANTEL FEAT 2
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites expert in Athletics
You easily pull yourself onto ledges. When you Grab an Edge,
you can pull yourself onto that surface and stand. You can use
Athletics instead of a Reflex save to Grab an Edge.
READ LIPS FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Society
You can read lips of others nearby who you can clearly see. When
you’re at your leisure, you can do this automatically. In encounter
mode or when attempting a more difficult feat of lipreading,
you’re fascinated and flat-footed during each round in which you
focus on lip movements, and you must succeed at a Society check
(DC determined by the GM) to successfully read someone’s lips. In
either case, the language read must be one that you know.
If you are deaf or hard of hearing and have Read Lips,
you recognize the lip movements for the spoken form of
your languages. You can also speak the spoken form of your
languages clearly enough for others to understand you.
RECOGNIZE SPELL [reaction] FEAT 1
GENERAL SECRET SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Arcana, Nature, Occultism, or Religion
Trigger A creature within line of sight casts a spell that you don’t
have prepared or in your spell repertoire, or a trap or similar
object casts such a spell. You must be aware of the casting.
If you are trained in the appropriate skill for the spell’s tradition
and it’s a common spell of 2nd level or lower, you automatically
identify it (you still roll to attempt to get a critical success, but
can’t get a worse result than success). The highest level of spell
FEATS 5
265
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
you automatically identify increases to 4 if you’re an expert, 6
if you’re a master, and 10 if you’re legendary. The GM rolls a
secret Arcana, Nature, Occultism, or Religion check, whichever
corresponds to the tradition of the spell being cast. If you’re
not trained in the skill, you can’t get a result better than failure.
Critical Success You correctly recognize the spell and gain a +1
circumstance bonus to your saving throw or your AC against it.
Success You correctly recognize the spell.
Failure You fail to recognize the spell.
Critical Failure You misidentify the spell as another spell
entirely, of the GM’s choice.
RIDE FEAT 1
GENERAL
When you Command an Animal you’re mounted on to take a
move action (such as Stride), you automatically succeed instead
of needing to attempt a check. Any animal you’re mounted on
acts on your turn, like a minion. If you Mount an animal in the
middle of an encounter, it skips its next turn and then acts on
your next turn. Page 249 has more on Command an Animal.
ROBUST RECOVERY FEAT 2
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites expert in Medicine
You learned folk medicine to help recover from diseases and
poison, and using it diligently has made you especially resilient.
When you Treat a Disease or a Poison, or someone else uses
one of these actions on you, increase the circumstance bonus
granted on a success to +4, and if the result of the patient’s
saving throw is a success, the patient gets a critical success.
SCARE TO DEATH [one-action] FEAT 15
DEATH EMOTION FEAR GENERAL INCAPACITATION SKILL
Prerequisites legendary in Intimidation
You can frighten foes so much, they might die. Attempt an
Intimidation check against the Will DC of a living creature within
30 feet of you that you sense or observe and who can sense or
observe you. If the target can’t hear you or doesn’t understand
the language you are speaking, you take a –4 circumstance
penalty. The creature is temporarily immune for 1 minute.
Critical Success The target must succeed at a Fortitude save
against your Intimidation DC or die. If the target succeeds
at its save, it becomes frightened 2 and is fleeing for 1
round; it suffers no effect on a critical success.
Success The target becomes frightened 2.
Failure The target becomes frightened 1.
Critical Failure The target is unaffected.
SHAMELESS REQUEST FEAT 7
GENERAL SKILL
Requirements master in Diplomacy
You can downplay the consequences or outrageousness of
your requests using sheer brazenness and charm. When you
Request something, you reduce any DC increases for making an
outrageous request by 2, and if you roll a critical failure for your
Request, you get a failure instead. While this means you can
never cause your target to reduce their attitude toward you by
making a Request, they eventually tire of requests, even though
they still have a positive attitude toward you.
SHIELD BLOCK [reaction] FEAT 1
GENERAL
Trigger While you have your shield raised, you would take
damage from a physical attack.
You snap your shield in place to ward off a blow. Your shield
prevents you from taking an amount of damage up to the
shield’s Hardness. You and the shield each take any remaining
damage, possibly breaking or destroying the shield.
SIGN LANGUAGE FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Society
You learn the sign languages associated with the languages
you know, allowing you to sign and understand signs. Sign
languages typically require both hands to convey more complex
concepts, and they are visual rather than auditory.
Sign language is difficult to understand during combat due
to the level of attention needed, unlike basic gestures like
pointing at a foe to suggest a target. Sign language is hard to
use in areas of low visibility, just like speech is difficult in a
noisy environment.
SKILL TRAINING FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites Intelligence 12
You become trained in the skill of your choice.
Special You can select this feat multiple times, choosing a
new skill to become trained in each time.
SLIPPERY SECRETS FEAT 7
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites master in Deception
You elude and evade attempts to uncover your true nature or
intentions. When a spell or magical effect tries to read your mind,
detect whether you are lying, or reveal your alignment, you can
attempt a Deception check against the spell or effect’s DC. If you
succeed, the effect reveals nothing.
SNARE CRAFTING FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Crafting
You can use the Craft activity to create snares, using the
rules from page 244. When you select this feat, you add the
formulas for four common snares to your formula book.
SPECIALTY CRAFTING FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Crafting
Your training focused on Crafting one particular kind of item.
Select one of the specialties listed on page 267; you gain a +1
circumstance bonus to Crafting checks to Craft items of that
type. If you are a master in Crafting, this bonus increases to +2.
Core Rulebook
266
If it’s unclear whether the specialty applies, the GM decides.
Some specialties might apply only partially. For example, if you
were making a morningstar and had specialty in woodworking,
the GM might give you half your bonus because the item
requires both blacksmithing and woodworking.
Specialty Applicable Items
Alchemy* Alchemical items such as elixirs
Artistry Fine art, including jewelry
Blacksmithing Durable metal goods, including metal armor
Bookmaking Books and paper
Glassmaking Glass, including glassware and windows
Leatherworking Leather goods, including leather armor
Pottery Ceramic goods
Shipbuilding Ships and boats
Stonemasonry Stone goods and structures
Tailoring Clothing
Weaving Textiles, baskets, and rugs
Woodworking Wooden goods and structures
* You must have the Alchemical Crafting skill feat to Craft
alchemical items.
STEADY BALANCE FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Acrobatics
You can keep your balance easily, even in adverse conditions.
Whenever you roll a success using the Balance action, you
get a critical success instead. You’re not flat-footed while
attempting to Balance on narrow surfaces and uneven
ground. Thanks to your incredible balance, you can attempt
an Acrobatics check instead of a Reflex save to Grab an Edge.
STREETWISE FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Society
You know about life on the streets and feel the pulse of your
local settlement. You can use your Society modifier instead
of your Diplomacy modifier to Gather Information. In any
settlement you frequent regularly, you can use the Recall
Knowledge action with Society to know the same sorts of
information that you could discover with Diplomacy to Gather
Information. The DC is usually significantly higher, but you
know the information without spending time gathering it. If
you fail to recall the information, you can still subsequently
attempt to Gather Information normally.
STUDENT OF THE CANON FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Religion
You’ve researched many faiths enough to recognize notions
about them that are unlikely to be true. If you roll a critical failure
at a Religion check to Decipher Writing of a religious nature or
to Recall Knowledge about the tenets of faiths, you get a failure
instead. When attempting to Recall Knowledge about the tenets
of your own faith, if you roll a failure, you get a success instead,
and if you roll a success, you get a critical success instead.
SUBTLE THEFT FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Thievery
When you successfully Steal something, observers (creatures
other than the creature you stole from) take a –2 circumstance
penalty to their Perception DCs to detect your theft.
Additionally, if you first Create a Diversion using Deception,
taking a single Palm an Object or Steal action doesn’t end your
undetected condition.
SURVEY WILDLIFE FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Survival
You can study details in the wilderness to determine the
presence of nearby creatures. You can spend 10 minutes
assessing the area around you to find out what creatures
are nearby, based on nests, scat, and marks on vegetation.
Attempt a Survival check against a DC determined by the GM
based on how obvious the signs are. On a success, you can
attempt a Recall Knowledge check with a –2 penalty to learn
more about the creatures just from these signs. If you’re a
master in Survival, you don’t take the penalty.
SWIFT SNEAK FEAT 7
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites master in Stealth
You can move your full Speed when you Sneak. You can use Swift
Sneak while Burrowing, Climbing, Flying, or Swimming instead
of Striding if you have the corresponding movement type.
TERRAIN EXPERTISE FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Survival
Your experience in navigating a certain type of terrain
makes you supremely confident while doing so. You gain
a +1 circumstance bonus to Survival checks in one of the
following types of terrain, chosen when you select this feat:
aquatic, arctic, desert, forest, mountain, plains, sky, swamp,
or underground.
Special You can select this feat more than once, choosing a
different type of terrain each time.
TERRAIN STALKER FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Stealth
Select one type of difficult terrain from the following list:
rubble, snow, or underbrush. While undetected by all
non-allies in that type of terrain, you can Sneak without
attempting a Stealth check as long as you move no more than
5 feet and do not move within 10 feet of an enemy at any point
during your movement. This also allows you to automatically
approach creatures to within 15 feet while Avoiding Notice
during exploration as long as they aren’t actively Searching
or on guard.
Special You can select this feat multiple times. Each time,
choose a different type of terrain.
FEATS 5
267
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
TERRIFIED RETREAT FEAT 7
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites master in Intimidation
When you critically succeed at the Demoralize action, if the
target’s level is lower than yours, the target is fleeing for 1 round.
TITAN WRESTLER FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Athletics
You can attempt to Disarm, Grapple, Shove, or Trip creatures
up to two sizes larger than you, or up to three sizes larger than
you if you’re legendary in Athletics.
TOUGHNESS FEAT 1
GENERAL
You can withstand more punishment than most before
succumbing. Increase your maximum Hit Points by your level.
You reduce the DC of recovery checks by 1 (page 459).
TRAIN ANIMAL FEAT 1
DOWNTIME GENERAL MANIPULATE SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Nature
You spend time teaching an animal to do a certain action. You
can either select a basic action the animal already knows how to
do (typically those listed in the Command an Animal action on
page 249) or attempt to teach the animal a new basic action. The
GM determines the DC of any check required and the amount
of time the training takes (usually at least a week). It’s usually
impossible to teach an animal a trick that uses critical thinking.
If you’re expert, master, or legendary in Nature, you might be
able to train more unusual creatures, at the GM’s discretion.
Success The animal learns the action. If it was an action the
animal already knew, you can Command the Animal to take
that action without attempting a Nature check. If it was a
new basic action, add that action to the actions the animal
can take when Commanded, but you must still roll.
Failure The animal doesn’t learn the trick.
TRICK MAGIC ITEM [one-action] FEAT 1
GENERAL MANIPULATE SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Arcana, Nature, Occultism, or Religion
You examine a magic item you normally couldn’t use in an effort
to fool it and activate it temporarily. For example, this might allow
a fighter to cast a spell from a wand or allow a wizard to cast a
spell that’s not on the arcane list using a scroll. You must know
what activating the item does, or you can’t attempt to trick it.
Attempt a check using the skill matching the item’s magic
tradition, or matching a tradition that has the spell on its list,
if you’re trying to cast a spell from the item. The relevant skills
are Arcana for arcane, Nature for primal, Occultism for occult,
Religion for divine, or any of the four for an item that has the
magical trait and not a tradition trait. The GM determines the
DC based on the item’s level (possibly adjusted depending on
the item or situation).
If you activate a magic item that requires a spell attack roll
or spell DC and you don’t have the ability to cast spells of the
relevant tradition, use your level as your proficiency bonus and
the highest of your Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma modifiers.
If you’re a master in the appropriate skill for the item’s tradition,
you instead use the trained proficiency bonus, and if you’re
legendary, you instead use the expert proficiency bonus.
Success For the rest of the current turn, you can spend actions
to activate the item as if you could normally use it.
Failure You can’t use the item or try to trick it again this turn,
but you can try again on subsequent turns.
Critical Failure You can’t use the item, and you can’t try to
trick it again until your next daily preparations.
UNDERWATER MARAUDER FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Athletics
You’ve learned to fight underwater. You are not flat-footed
while in water, and you don’t take the usual penalties for using
a bludgeoning or slashing melee weapon in water.
UNIFIED THEORY FEAT 15
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites legendary in Arcana
You’ve started to make a meaningful connection about the
common underpinnings of the four traditions of magic and
magical essences, allowing you to understand them all through
an arcane lens. Whenever you use an action or a skill feat that
requires a Nature, Occultism, or Religion check, depending on
the magic tradition, you can use Arcana instead. If you would
normally take a penalty or have a higher DC for using Arcana
on other magic (such as when using Identify Magic), you no
longer do so.
UNMISTAKABLE LORE FEAT 2
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites expert in Lore
You never get information about your areas of expertise wrong.
When you Recall Knowledge using any Lore subcategory in
which you’re trained, if you roll a critical failure, you get a failure
instead. If you’re a master in a Lore subcategory, on a critical
success, you gain even more information or context than usual.
UNTRAINED IMPROVISATION FEAT 3
GENERAL
You’ve learned how to handle situations when you’re out of
your depth. Your proficiency bonus to untrained skill checks
is equal to half your level instead of +0. If you’re 7th level
or higher, the bonus increases to your full level instead. This
doesn’t allow you to use the skill’s trained actions.
VIRTUOSIC PERFORMER FEAT 1
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites trained in Performance
You have exceptional talent with one type of performance. You
gain a +1 circumstance bonus when making a certain type of
performance. If you are a master in Performance, this bonus
increases to +2. Select one of the following specialties and apply
Core Rulebook
268
the bonus when attempting Performance checks of that type. If
it’s unclear whether the specialty applies, the GM decides.
Specialty Examples
Acting Drama, pantomime, puppetry
Comedy Buffoonery, joke telling, limericks
Dance Ballet, huara, jig, macru
Keyboards Harpsichord, organ, piano
Oratory Epic, ode, poetry, storytelling
Percussion Chimes, drum, gong, xylophone
Singing Ballad, chant, melody, rhyming
Strings Fiddle, harp, lute, viol
Winds Bagpipe, flute, recorder, trumpet
WALL JUMP FEAT 7
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites master in Athletics
You can use your momentum from a jump to propel yourself
off a wall. If you’re adjacent to a wall at the end of a jump
(whether performing a High Jump, Long Jump, or Leap),
you don’t fall as long as your next action is another jump.
Furthermore, since your previous jump gives you momentum,
you can use High Jump or Long Jump as a single action, but
you don’t get to Stride as part of the activity.
You can use Wall Jump only once in a turn, unless you’re
legendary in Athletics, in which case you can use Wall Jump as
many times as you can use consecutive jump actions in that turn.
WARD MEDIC FEAT 2
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites expert in Medicine
You’ve studied in large medical wards, treating several patients
at once and tending to all their needs. When you use Treat
Disease or Treat Wounds, you can treat up to two targets. If
you’re a master in Medicine, you can treat up to four targets,
and if you’re legendary, you can treat up to eight targets.
WARY DISARMAMENT FEAT 2
GENERAL SKILL
Prerequisites expert in Thievery
If you trigger a device or set off a trap while disarming it, you
gain a +2 circumstance bonus to your AC or saving throw
against the device or trap. This applies only to attacks or
effects triggered by your failed attempt, not to any later ones,
such as additional attacks from a complex trap.
WEAPON PROFICIENCY FEAT 1
GENERAL
You become trained in all simple weapons. If you were already
trained in all simple weapons, you become trained in all martial
weapons. If you were already trained in all martial weapons,
you become trained in one advanced weapon of your choice.
Special You can select this feat more than once. Each
time you do, you become trained in additional weapons as
appropriate, following the above progression.
FEATS 5
269
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Core Rulebook
270
Chapter 6: Equipment
To make your mark on the world, you’ll need to have the right equipment, including
armor, weapons, and other gear. This chapter presents the various equipment that you can
purchase during character creation. You can usually find these items for sale in most cities
and other large settlements.
TABLE 6–1: COIN VALUES
Coins CP SP GP PP
Copper piece (cp) 1 1/10 1/100 1/1,000
Silver piece (sp) 10 1 1/10 1/100
Gold piece (gp) 100 10 1 1/10
Platinum piece (pp) 1,000 100 10 1
Your character starts out with 15 gold pieces (150 silver
pieces) to spend on any common items from this chapter.
Items with an uncommon rarity can be purchased only if
you have special access from abilities you selected during
character creation or your GM gives you permission to
purchase them.
Once you’ve purchased your starting items, there are
three main ways to gain new items and equipment: you
can find them during an adventure, make them using the
Crafting skill, or purchase them from a merchant.
Coins and Currency
Though you might be able to barter valuable items in
some areas, currency is the most versatile way to make
transactions when you head to market. The most common
currency is coins. For most commoners and beginning
adventurers, the standard unit is the silver piece (sp). Each
silver piece is a standard weight of silver and is typically
accepted by any merchant or kingdom no matter where
it was minted. There are three other common types of
coins, each likewise standardized in weight and value. The
first is the copper piece (cp). Each copper piece is worth
one‑tenth of a silver piece. The gold piece (gp) is often used
for purchasing magic items and other expensive items, as
1 gold piece is worth 10 silver pieces or 100 copper pieces.
The platinum piece (pp) is used by nobles to demonstrate
their wealth, for the purchase of very expensive items, or
simply as a way to easily transport large sums of currency.
A platinum piece is worth 10 gold pieces, 100 silver pieces,
or 1,000 copper pieces. See Table 6–1: Coin Values for the
exchange rates of common types of coins.
Other Currency
Art objects, gems, and raw materials (such as those used
for the Craft activity) can be used much like currency:
you can sell them for the same Price you can buy them.
Price
Most items in the following tables have a Price, which is
the amount of currency it typically takes to purchase that
item. An item with a Price of “—” can’t be purchased. An
item with a Price of 0 is normally free, but its value could
be higher based on the materials used to create it. Most
items can be sold for half their Price, but coins, gems, art
objects, and raw materials (such as components for the
Craft activity) can be exchanged for their full Price.
Item Level
Each item has an item level, which represents the item’s
complexity and any magic used in its construction.
Simpler items with a lower level are easier to construct,
and you can’t Craft items that have a higher level than
your own (page 243). If an item’s level isn’t listed, its level
is 0. While characters can use items of any level, GMs
should keep in mind that allowing characters access to
items far above their current level may have a negative
impact on the game.
Carrying and Using Items
A character typically has two hands, allowing them to hold
an item in each hand or a single two-handed item using
both hands. Drawing or changing how you’re carrying an
item usually requires you to use an Interact action (though
to drop an item, you use the Release action instead).
Table 6–2: Changing Equipment on page 273 lists some
ways that you might change the items you’re holding or
carrying, and the number of hands you need to do so.
Many ways of using items require you to spend
multiple actions. For example, drinking a potion stowed in
your belt pouch requires using an Interact action to draw
it and then using a second action to drink it as described in
its Activate entry (page 532).
Bulk
Carrying especially heavy or unwieldy items can make
it more difficult for you to move, as can overloading
yourself with too much gear. The Bulk value of an item
reflects how difficult the item is to handle, representing its
size, weight, and general awkwardness. If you have a high
Strength score, you usually don’t need to worry about
Bulk unless you’re carrying numerous substantial items.
Starting Money
15 gp (150 sp)
6
271
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Bulk Limits
You can carry an amount of Bulk equal to 5 plus your
Strength modifier without penalty; if you carry more, you
gain the encumbered condition. You can’t hold or carry
more Bulk than 10 plus your Strength modifier.
Encumbered
You are carrying more weight than you can manage.
While you’re encumbered, you’re clumsy 1 and take
a –10-foot penalty to all your Speeds. As with all
penalties to your Speed, this can’t reduce your Speed
below 5 feet.
Bulk Values
Items can have a number to indicate their Bulk value,
or they can be light (indicated by an L) or negligible
(indicated by a —) for the purpose of determining Bulk.
For instance, full plate armor is 4 Bulk, a longsword is
1 Bulk, a dagger or scroll is light, and a piece of chalk is
negligible. Ten light items count as 1 Bulk, and you round
down fractions (so 9 light items count as 0 Bulk, and 11
light items count as 1 Bulk). Items of negligible Bulk don’t
count toward Bulk unless you try to carry vast numbers
of them, as determined by the GM.
Estimating an Item’s Bulk
As a general rule, an item that weighs 5 to 10 pounds is 1
Bulk, an item weighing less than a few ounces is negligible,
and anything in between is light. Particularly awkward or
unwieldy items might have higher Bulk values. For example,
a 10-foot pole isn’t heavy, but its length makes it difficult
for you to move while you have one on your person, so its
Bulk is 1. Items made for larger or smaller creatures have
greater or lesser Bulk, as described on page 295.
Bulk of Coins
Coins are a popular means of exchange due to their
portability, but they can still add up. A thousand coins
of any denomination or combination of denominations
count as 1 Bulk. It’s not usually necessary to determine
the Bulk of coins in fractions of 1,000; simply round
down fractions of 1,000. In other words, 100 coins
don’t count as a light item, and 1,999 coins are 1 Bulk,
not 2.
Bulk of Creatures
You might need to know the Bulk of a creature, especially
if you need to carry someone off the battlefield. The table
that follows lists the typical Bulk of a creature based on its
size, but the GM might adjust this number.
Size of Creature Bulk
 Tiny 1
Small 3
Medium 6
Large 12
Huge 24
Gargantuan 48
Dragging
In some situations, you might drag an object or creature
rather than carry it. If you’re dragging something, treat
its Bulk as half. Typically, you can drag one thing at
a time, you must use both hands to do so, and you
drag slowly—roughly 50 feet per minute unless you
have some means to speed it up. Use the total Bulk of
what you’re dragging, so if you have a sack laden with
goods, use the sum of all the Bulk it carries instead of an
individual item within.
Wielding Items
Some abilities require you to wield an item, typically a
weapon. You’re wielding an item any time you’re holding
it in the number of hands needed to use it effectively.
When wielding an item, you’re not just carrying it
around—you’re ready to use it. Other abilities might
require you to merely carry or have an item. These apply
as long as you have the item on your person; you don’t
have to wield it.
Item Damage
An item can be broken or destroyed if it takes enough
damage. Every item has a Hardness value. Each time an
item takes damage, reduce any damage the item takes by
its Hardness. The rest of the damage reduces the item’s
Hit Points. Normally an item takes damage only when
a creature is directly attacking it—commonly targeted
items include doors and traps. A creature that attacks
you doesn’t normally damage your armor or other gear,
even if it hits you. However, the Shield Block reaction can
cause your shield to take damage as you use it to prevent
damage to yourself, and some monsters have exceptional
abilities that can damage your items.
An item that takes damage can become broken
and eventually destroyed. It becomes broken when
its Hit Points are equal to or lower than its Broken
Threshold (BT); once its Hit Points are reduced to 0,
it is destroyed. A broken item has the broken condition
until Repaired above its Broken Threshold. Anything
that automatically makes an item broken immediately
reduces its Hit Points to its Broken Threshold if the item
had more Hit Points than that when the effect occurred.
If an item has no Broken Threshold, then it has no
relevant changes to its function due to being broken,
but it’s still destroyed at 0 Hit Points. (See the broken
condition definition on page 273 for more information.)
A destroyed item can’t be Repaired.
An item’s Hardness, Hit Points, and Broken Threshold
usually depend on the material the item is made of. This
information appears on page 577.
Core Rulebook
272
TABLE 6–2: CHANGING EQUIPMENT
Change Hands Action
Draw, stow, or pick up an item1 1 or 2 Interact
Pass an item to or take an item from a willing creature2 1 or 2 Interact
Drop an item to the ground 1 or 2 Release
Detach a shield or item strapped to you 1 Interact
Change your grip by removing a hand from an item 2 Release
Change your grip by adding a hand to an item 2 Interact
Retrieve an item from a backpack3
 or satchel 2 Interact
1 If you retrieve a two-handed item with only one hand, you still need to change your grip before you can wield or use it.
2 A creature must have a hand free for someone to pass an item to them, and they might then need to change their grip if they
receive an item requiring two hands to wield or use.
3 Retrieving an item stowed in your own backpack requires first taking off the backpack with a separate Interact action.
Broken
Broken is a condition that affects objects. An object is
broken when damage has reduced its Hit Points below
its Broken Threshold. A broken object can’t be used for
its normal function, nor does it grant bonuses—with the
exception of armor. Broken armor still grants its item
bonus to AC, but it also imparts a status penalty to AC
depending on its category: –1 for broken light armor, –2 for
broken medium armor, or –3 for broken heavy armor.
A broken item still imposes penalties and limitations
normally incurred by carrying, holding, or wearing it. For
example, broken armor would still impose its Dexterity
modifier cap, check penalty, and so forth.
If an effect makes an item broken automatically and the
item has more HP than its Broken Threshold, that effect
also reduces the item’s current HP to the Broken Threshold.
Object Immunities
Inanimate objects and hazards are immune to bleed,
death effects, disease, healing, mental effects, necromancy,
nonlethal attacks, and poison, as well as the doomed,
drained, fatigued, paralyzed, sickened, and unconscious
conditions. An item that has a mind is not immune to mental
effects. Many objects are immune to other conditions, at the
GM’s discretion. For instance, a sword has no Speed, so it
can’t take a penalty to its Speed, but an effect that causes a
Speed penalty might work on a moving blade trap.
Shoddy Items
Improvised or of dubious make, shoddy items are never
available for purchase except for in the most desperate of
communities. When available, a shoddy item usually costs
half the Price of a standard item, though you can never sell
one in any case. Attacks and checks involving a shoddy
item take a –2 item penalty. This penalty also applies to any
DCs that a shoddy item applies to (such as AC, for shoddy
armor). A shoddy suit of armor also worsens the armor’s
check penalty by 2. A shoddy item’s Hit Points and Broken
Threshold are each half that of a normal item of its type.
EQUIPMENT 6
273
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Armor
Armor increases your character’s defenses, but some medium or heavy armor can hamper
movement. If you want to increase your character’s defense beyond the protection your armor
provides, they can use a shield. Armor protects your character only while they’re wearing it.
Armor Class
Your Armor Class (AC) measures how well you can
defend against attacks. When a creature attacks you, your
Armor Class is the DC for that attack roll.
Armor Class = 10 + Dexterity modifier (up to your
armor’s Dex Cap) + proficiency bonus + armor’s
item bonus to AC + other bonuses + penalties
Use your proficiency bonus for the category (light,
medium, or heavy) or the specific type of armor you’re
wearing. If you’re not wearing armor, use your proficiency
in unarmored defense.
Donning and Removing
Armor
Getting in and out of armor is time consuming—so
make sure you’re wearing it when you need it! Donning
and removing armor are both activities involving many
Interact actions. It takes 1 minute to don light armor, 5
minutes to don medium or heavy armor, and 1 minute to
remove any armor.
Armor Statistics
Table 6–3: Unarmored Defense provides the statistics
for the various forms of protection without wearing
armor. Table 6–4: Armor provides the statistics for suits
of armor that can be purchased and worn, organized
by category. The columns in both tables provide the
following statistics.
Category
The armor’s category—unarmored, light armor, medium
armor, or heavy armor—indicates which proficiency
bonus you use while wearing the armor.
AC Bonus
This number is the item bonus you add for the armor
when determining Armor Class.
Dexterity Modifier Cap (Dex Cap)
This number is the maximum amount of your
Dexterity modifier that can apply to your AC while you
are wearing a given suit of armor. For example, if you
have a Dexterity modifier of +4 and you are wearing
a suit of half plate, you apply only a +1 bonus from
your Dexterity modifier to your AC while wearing
that armor.
Check Penalty
While wearing your armor, you take this penalty to
Strength- and Dexterity-based skill checks, except for
those that have the attack trait. If you meet the armor’s
Strength threshold (see Strength below), you don’t take
this penalty.
Speed Penalty
While wearing a suit of armor, you take the penalty
listed in this entry to your Speed, as well as to any other
movement types you have, such as a climb Speed or swim
Speed, to a minimum Speed of 5 feet. If you meet the
armor’s Strength threshold (see below), you reduce the
penalty by 5 feet.
Strength
This entry indicates the Strength score at which you are
strong enough to overcome some of the armor’s penalties.
If your Strength is equal to or greater than this value,
you no longer take the armor’s check penalty, and you
decrease the Speed penalty by 5 feet (to no penalty if the
penalty was –5 feet, or to a –5-foot penalty if the penalty
was –10 feet).
Bulk
This entry gives the armor’s Bulk, assuming you’re
wearing the armor and distributing its weight across
your body. A suit of armor that’s carried or worn usually
has 1 more Bulk than what’s listed here (or 1 Bulk total
for armor of light Bulk). An armor’s Bulk is increased or
decreased if it’s sized for creatures that aren’t Small or
Medium in size, following the rules on page 295.
Group
Each type of medium and heavy armor belongs to an
armor group, which classifies it with similar types of
armor. Some abilities reference armor groups, typically
to grant armor specialization effects, which are described
on page 275.
Armor Traits
The traits for each suit of armor appear in this entry.
Armor can have the following traits.
Bulwark: The armor covers you so completely that
it provides benefits against some damaging effects.
On Reflex saves to avoid a damaging effect, such
as a fireball, you add a +3 modifier instead of your
Dexterity modifier. 
Core Rulebook
274
TABLE 6–3: UNARMORED DEFENSE
Unarmored Price AC Bonus Dex Cap Check Penalty Speed Penalty Bulk Armor Traits
No armor — +0 — — — — —
Explorer’s clothing 1 sp +0 +5 — — L Comfort
TABLE 6–4: ARMOR
Light Armor Price AC Bonus Dex Cap Check Penalty Speed Penalty Strength Bulk Group Armor Traits
Padded armor 2 sp +1 +3 — — 10 L — Comfort
Leather 2 gp +1 +4 –1 — 10 1 — —
Studded leather 3 gp +2 +3 –1 — 12 1 — —
Chain shirt 5 gp +2 +3 –1 — 12 1 — Flexible, Noisy
Medium Armor Price AC Bonus Dex Cap Check Penalty Speed Penalty Strength Bulk Group Armor Traits
Hide 2 gp +3 +2 –2 –5 ft. 14 2 Leather —
Scale mail 4 gp +3 +2 –2 –5 ft. 14 2 Composite —
Chain mail 6 gp +4 +1 –2 –5 ft. 16 2 Chain Flexible, noisy
Breastplate 8 gp +4 +1 –2 –5 ft. 16 2 Plate —
Heavy Armor Price AC Bonus Dex Cap Check Penalty Speed Penalty Strength Bulk Group Armor Traits
Splint mail (level 1) 13 gp +5 +1 –3 –10 ft. 16 3 Composite —
Half plate (level 1) 18 gp +5 +1 –3 –10 ft. 16 3 Plate —
Full plate (level 2) 30 gp +6 +0 –3 –10 ft. 18 4 Plate Bulwark
MATERIALS
Most suits of armor and weapons are made from ordinary,
commonly available materials like iron, leather, steel, and
wood. If you’re not sure what a suit of armor is made of,
the GM determines the details.
Some armor, shields, and weapons are instead
made of precious materials. These often have inherent
supernatural properties. Cold iron, for example, which
harms fey, and silver can damage werecreatures. These
materials are detailed beginning on page 577.
Comfort: The armor is so comfortable that you can
rest normally while wearing it.
Flexible: The armor is flexible enough that it doesn’t
hinder most actions. You don’t apply its check penalty to
Acrobatics or Athletics checks.
Noisy: This armor is loud and likely to alert others
to your presence when you’re using the Avoid Notice
exploration activity (page 479).
Armor Specialization Effects
Certain class features can grant you additional benefits
with certain armors. This is called an armor specialization
effect. The exact effect depends on which armor group
your armor belongs to, as listed below. Only medium and
heavy armors have armor specialization effects.
Chain: The armor is so flexible it can bend with a
critical hit and absorb some of the blow. Reduce the
damage from critical hits by either 4 + the value of the
armor’s potency rune for medium armor, or 6 + the value
of the armor’s potency rune for heavy armor. This can’t
reduce the damage to less than the damage rolled for the
hit before doubling for a critical hit.
Composite: The numerous overlapping pieces of
this armor protect you from piercing attacks. You gain
resistance to piercing damage equal to 1 + the value of the
armor’s potency rune for medium armor, or 2 + the value
of the armor’s potency rune for heavy armor.
Leather: The thick second skin of the armor disperses
blunt force to reduce bludgeoning damage. You gain
resistance to bludgeoning damage equal to 1 + the value
of the armor’s potency rune for medium armor, or 2 + the
value of the armor’s potency rune for heavy armor.
Plate: The sturdy plate provides no purchase for a
cutting edge. You gain resistance to slashing damage
equal to 1 + the value of the armor’s potency rune for
medium armor, or 2 + the value of the armor’s potency
rune for heavy armor.
Armor Descriptions
Each type of armor is described in more detail below.
Breastplate: Though referred to as a breastplate,
this type of armor consists of several pieces of plate
or half‑plate armor (page 276) that protect the torso,
chest, neck, and sometimes the hips and lower legs. It
strategically grants some of the protection of plate while
allowing greater flexibility and speed.
Chain Mail: A suit of chain mail consists of several
pieces of armor composed of small metal rings linked
together in a protective mesh. It typically includes a chain
shirt, leggings, a pair of arms, and a coif, collectively
protecting most of the body.
Chain Shirt: Sometimes called a hauberk, this is a long
shirt constructed of the same metal rings as chainmail.
However, it is much lighter than chainmail and protects
only the torso, upper arms, and upper legs of its wearer.
EQUIPMENT 6
275
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Explorer’s Clothing: Adventurers who don’t wear
armor travel in durable clothing. Though it’s not armor
and uses your unarmored defense proficiency, it still has
a Dex Cap and can grant an item bonus to AC if etched
with potency runes (as described on page 581).
Full Plate: Plate mail consists of interlocking plates
that encase nearly the entire body in a carapace of steel.
It is costly and heavy, and the wearer often requires
help to don it correctly, but it provides some of the best
defense armor can supply. A suit of this armor comes
with an undercoat of padded armor (see below) and a
pair of gauntlets (page 285).
Half Plate: Half plate consists of most of the upper body
plates used in full plate, with lighter or sparser steel plate
protection for the arms and legs. This provides some of the
protection of full plate with greater flexibility and speed.
A suit of this armor comes with an undercoat of padded
armor (see below) and a pair of gauntlets (page 285).
Hide: A mix of furs, sturdy hide, and sometimes molded
boiled leather, this armor provides protection due to its
layers of leather, though its bulkiness slows the wearer
down and decreases mobility.
Leather: A mix of flexible and molded boiled leather, a
suit of this type of armor provides some protection with
maximum flexibility.
Padded Armor: This armor is simply a layer of heavy,
quilted cloth, but it is sometimes used because it’s so
inexpensive. Padded armor is easier to damage
and destroy than other types of armor. Heavy
armor comes with a padded armor undercoat
included in its Price, though it loses the comfort
trait when worn under heavy armor. You can wear
just that padded armor undercoat to sleep in, if your
heavy armor is destroyed, or when otherwise not
wearing the full heavy armor. This allows you to
keep the armor invested and benefit from the
power of any runes on the associated heavy
armor, but no one else can wear your heavy
armor without the padded undercoat.
Scale Mail: Scale mail consists of many metal scales
sewn onto a reinforced leather backing, often in the form
of a long shirt that protects the torso, arms, and legs.
Splint Mail: This type of armor is chain mail reinforced
with flexible, interlocking metal plates, typically located
on the wearer’s torso, upper arms, and legs. A suit of
this armor comes with an undercoat of padded armor
(see above) and a pair of gauntlets (page 285).
Studded Leather: This leather armor is reinforced
with metal studs and sometimes small metal plates,
providing most of the flexibility of leather armor with
more robust protection.
DAMAGING ARMOR
Your armor’s statistics are based on the material it’s
predominantly made from. It’s not likely your armor
will take damage, as explained in Item Damage on
page 272.
Material Hardness HP BT
Cloth (explorer’s clothing, 1 4 2
padded armor)
Leather (hide, leather, studded 4 16 8
leather)
Metal (breastplate, chain mail, 9 36 18
chain shirt, full plate, half plate,
scale mail, splint mail)
Core Rulebook
276
Raise a Shield is the action most commonly used with
shields. Most shields must be held in one hand, so you
can’t hold anything with that hand and Raise a Shield. A
buckler, however, doesn’t take up your hand, so you can
Raise a Shield with a buckler if the hand is free (or, at
the GM’s discretion, if it’s holding a simple, lightweight
object that’s not a weapon). You lose the benefits of Raise
a Shield if that hand is no longer free.
When you have a tower shield raised, you can use the
Take Cover action (page 471) to increase the circumstance
bonus to AC to +4. This lasts until the shield is no longer
raised. If you would normally provide lesser cover against
an attack, having your tower shield raised provides
standard cover against it (and other creatures can Take
Cover as normal using the cover from your shield).
If you have access to the Shield Block reaction (from
your class or from a feat), you can use it while Raising
your Shield to reduce the damage you take by an amount
equal to the shield’s Hardness. Both you and the shield
then take any remaining damage.
Shield Statistics
Shields have statistics that follow the same rules as armor:
Price, Speed Penalty, and Bulk. See page 274 for the rules
for those statistics. Their other statistics are described here.
AC Bonus
A shield grants a circumstance bonus to AC, but only
when the shield is raised. This requires using the Raise a
Shield action, found on page 472.
Hardness
Whenever a shield takes damage, the amount of damage it
takes is reduced by this amount. This number is particularly
relevant for shields because of the Shield Block feat
(page 266). The rules for Hardness appear on page 272.
TABLE 6–5: SHIELDS
Shield Price AC Bonus
1 Speed Penalty Bulk Hardness HP (BT)
Buckler 1 gp +1 — L 3 6 (3)
Wooden shield 1 gp +2 — 1 3 12 (6)
Steel shield 2 gp +2 — 1 5 20 (10)
Tower shield 10 gp +2/+4
2 –5 ft. 4 5 20 (10)
1 Gaining a shield’s circumstance bonus to AC requires using the Raise a Shield action (found on page 472).
2
 Getting the higher bonus for a tower shield requires using the Take Cover action (page 471) while the shield is raised.
HP (BT)
This column lists the shield’s Hit Points (HP) and Broken
Threshold (BT). These measure how much damage the
shield can take before it’s destroyed (its total HP) and how
much it can take before being broken and unusable (its BT).
These matter primarily for the Shield Block reaction.
Attacking with a Shield
A shield can be used as a martial weapon for attacks,
using the statistics listed for a shield bash on Table 6–7:
Melee Weapons (page 280). The shield bash is an option
only for shields that weren’t designed to be used as
weapons. A shield can’t have runes added to it. You can
also buy and attach a shield boss or shield spikes to a
shield to make it a more practical weapon. These can be
found on Table 6–7. These work like other weapons and
can even be etched with runes.
Shield Descriptions
Each type of shield is described in more detail below.
Buckler: This very small shield is a favorite of duelists
and quick, lightly armored warriors. It’s typically made of
steel and strapped to your forearm. You can Raise a Shield
with your buckler as long as you have that hand free or
are holding a light object that’s not a weapon in that hand.
Wooden Shield: Though they come in a variety of shapes
and sizes, the protection offered by wooden shields comes
from the stoutness of their materials. While wooden shields
are less expensive than steel shields, they break more easily.
Steel Shield: Like wooden shields, steel shields come
in a variety of shapes and sizes. Though more expensive
than wooden shields, they are much more durable.
Tower Shield: These massive shields can be used to
provide cover to nearly the entire body. Due to their size,
they are typically made of wood reinforced with metal.
Shields
A shield can increase your character’s defense beyond the protection their armor provides.
Your character must be wielding a shield in one hand to make use of it, and it grants its
bonus to AC only if they use an action to Raise a Shield. This action grants the shield’s bonus
to AC as a circumstance bonus until their next turn starts. A shield’s Speed penalty applies
whenever your character is holding the shield, whether they have raised it or not.
EQUIPMENT 6
277
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Attack Rolls
When making an attack roll, determine the result by
rolling 1d20 and adding your attack modifier for the
weapon or unarmed attack you’re using. Modifiers for
melee and ranged attacks are calculated differently.
Melee attack modifier = Strength modifier (or
optionally Dexterity for a finesse weapon) +
proficiency bonus + other bonuses + penalties
Ranged attack modifier = Dexterity modifier +
proficiency bonus + other bonuses + penalties
Bonuses, and penalties apply to these rolls just like
with other types of checks. Weapons with potency runes
(page 581) add an item bonus to your attack rolls.
Multiple Attack Penalty
If you use an action with the attack trait more than once
on the same turn, your attacks after the first take a penalty
called a multiple attack penalty. Your second attack takes a
–5 penalty, and any subsequent attacks take a –10 penalty.
The multiple attack penalty doesn’t apply to attacks
you make when it isn’t your turn (such as attacks made as
part of a reaction). You can use a weapon with the agile
trait (page 282) to reduce your multiple attack penalty.
Damage Rolls
When the result of your attack roll with a weapon or
unarmed attack equals or exceeds your target’s AC, you
hit your target! Roll the weapon or unarmed attack’s
damage die and add the relevant modifiers, bonuses, and
penalties to determine the amount of damage you deal.
Calculate a damage roll as follows.
Melee damage roll = damage die of weapon or unarmed
attack + Strength modifier + bonuses + penalties
Ranged damage roll = damage die of weapon + Strength
modifier for thrown weapons + bonuses + penalties
Ranged weapons don’t normally add an ability modifier
to the damage roll, though weapons with the propulsive
trait (page 283) add half your Strength modifier (or your
full modifier if it is a negative number), and thrown
weapons add your full Strength modifier.
Magic weapons with striking, greater striking, or
major striking runes (page 581) add one or more weapon
damage dice to your damage roll. These extra dice are
the same die size as the weapon’s damage die. At higher
levels, most characters also gain extra damage from
weapon specialization.
Critical Hits
When you make an attack and roll a natural 20 (the
number on the die is 20), or if the result of your attack
exceeds the target’s AC by 10, you achieve a critical
success (also known as a critical hit).
If you critically succeed at a Strike, your attack deals
double damage (page 451). Other attacks, such as spell
attack rolls and some uses of the Athletics skill, describe
the specific effects that occur when their outcomes are
critical successes.
Unarmed Attacks
Almost all characters start out trained in unarmed
attacks. You can Strike with your fist or another body
part, calculating your attack and damage rolls in the
same way you would with a weapon. Unarmed attacks
can belong to a weapon group (page 280), and they
might have weapon traits (page 282). However, unarmed
attacks aren’t weapons, and effects and abilities that
work with weapons never work with unarmed attacks
unless they specifically say so.
Table 6–6: Unarmed Attacks lists the statistics for an
unarmed attack with a fist, though you’ll usually use the
same statistics for attacks made with any other parts
of your body. Certain ancestry feats, class features, and
spells give access to special, more powerful unarmed
attacks. Details for those unarmed attacks are provided
in the abilities that grant them.
Improvised Weapons
If you attack with something that wasn’t built to be a
weapon, such as a chair or a vase, you’re making an
attack with an improvised weapon. You take a –2 item
penalty to attack rolls with an improvised weapon.
The GM determines the amount and type of damage
the attack deals, if any, as well as any weapon traits the
improvised weapon should have.
Weapons
Most characters in Pathfinder carry weapons, ranging from mighty warhammers to graceful
bows to even simple clubs. Full details on how you calculate the bonuses, modifiers, and
penalties for attack rolls and damage rolls are given in Chapter 9 on page 446, but they’re
summarized here, followed by the rules for weapons and dozens of weapon choices.
Core Rulebook
278
Weapon Statistics
The tables on pages 280–282 list the statistics for various
melee and ranged weapons that you can purchase, as well
as the statistics for striking with a fist (or another basic
unarmed attack). The tables present the following statistics.
All weapons listed in this chapter have an item level of 0.
Damage
This entry lists the weapon’s damage die and the type of
damage it deals: B for bludgeoning, P for piercing, or S
for slashing.
Damage Dice
Each weapon lists the damage die used for its damage
roll. A standard weapon deals one die of damage, but a
magical striking rune can increase the number of dice
rolled, as can some special actions and spells. These
additional dice use the same die size as the weapon or
unarmed attack’s normal damage die.
Counting Damage Dice
Effects based on a weapon’s number of damage dice
include only the weapon’s damage die plus any extra dice
from a striking rune. They don’t count extra dice from
abilities, critical specialization effects, property runes,
weapon traits, or the like.
Increasing Die Size
When an effect calls on you to increase the size of your
weapon damage dice, instead of using its normal weapon
damage dice, use the next larger die, as listed below (so if
you were using a d4, you’d use a d6, and so on). If you are
already using a d12, the size is already at its maximum.
You can’t increase your weapon damage die size more
than once.
1d4 ➞ 1d6 ➞ 1d8 ➞ 1d10 ➞ 1d12
Range
Ranged and thrown weapons have a range increment.
Attacks with these weapons work normally up to
that distance. Attack rolls beyond a weapon’s range
increment take a –2 penalty for each additional multiple
of that increment between you and the target. Attacks
beyond the sixth range increment are impossible.
For example, a shortbow takes no penalty against a
target up to 60 feet away, a –2 penalty against a target
beyond 60 feet but up to 120 feet away, and a –4 penalty
against a target beyond 120 feet but up to 180 feet away,
and so on, up to 360 feet.
Reload
While all weapons need some amount of time to get into
position, many ranged weapons also need to be loaded and
reloaded. This entry indicates how many Interact actions
it takes to reload such weapons. This can be 0 if drawing
ammunition and firing the weapon are part of the same
action. If an item takes 2 or more actions to reload, the
GM determines whether they must be performed together
as an activity, or you can spend some of those actions
during one turn and the rest during your next turn.
An item with an entry of “—” must be drawn to be
thrown, which usually takes an Interact action just like
drawing any other weapon. Reloading a ranged weapon
and drawing a thrown weapon both require a free hand.
Switching your grip to free a hand and then to place your
hands in the grip necessary to wield the weapon are both
included in the actions you spend to reload a weapon.
Bulk
This entry gives the weapon’s Bulk. A weapon’s Bulk is
increased or decreased if it’s sized for creatures that aren’t
Small or Medium size, following the rules on page 295.
Hands
Some weapons require one hand to wield, and others
require two. A few items, such as a longbow, list 1+ for
its Hands entry. You can hold a weapon with a 1+ entry
in one hand, but the process of shooting it requires using
a second to retrieve, nock, and loose an arrow. This means
you can do things with your free hand while holding the
SELECTING WEAPONS
Characters who focus on combat need to carefully
consider their choice of weapons, evaluating whether
they want to fight in melee or at range, the weapons’
damage potential, and the special features of various
weapons. Characters who are primarily spellcasters
usually just need to pick a backup weapon in the best
category they’re trained or better in.
When selecting weapons, start by identifying the
weapon types you’re trained or better in. You should then
compare weapons within these types to determine which
ones you will have the highest melee or ranged attack
modifier with. It’s usually considered best practice to
select both a melee and ranged weapon during character
creation so you can contend with a broader variety of
foes and situations.
Weapon Categories
Weapons fall into broad categories depending on how
much damage they deal and what traits they have.
Martial weapons generally deal more damage than simple
weapons, and advanced weapons generally have more
advantageous traits than martial weapons with the same
damage. Generally, you’ll want to select weapons that deal
more damage, but if you’re a highly skilled combatant, you
might want to pick a weapon with interesting traits, even
if it has a lower weapon damage die. You can also purchase
multiple weapons within your budget, allowing you to
switch between them for different situations.
EQUIPMENT 6
279
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
bow without changing your grip, but the other hand must
be free when you shoot. To properly wield a 1+ weapon,
you must hold it in one hand and also have a hand free.
Weapons requiring two hands typically deal more damage.
Some one-handed weapons have the two-hand trait, causing
them to deal a different size of weapon damage die when
used in two hands. In addition, some abilities require you
to wield a weapon in two hands. You meet this requirement
while holding the weapon in two hands, even if it doesn’t
require two hands or have the two-hand trait.
Group
A weapon or unarmed attack’s group classifies it with
similar weapons. Groups affect some abilities and what
the weapon does on a critical hit if you have access to
that weapon or unarmed attack’s critical specialization
effects; for full details, see page 283.
Weapon Traits
The traits a weapon or unarmed attack has are listed in
this entry. Any trait that refers to a “weapon” can also
apply to an unarmed attack that has that trait.
Ammunition
Some entries in the ranged weapons tables are followed
by an entry indicating the type of ammunition that
weapon launches. The damage die is determined by the
weapon, not the ammunition. Because that and other
relevant statistics vary by weapon, ammunition entries
list only the name, quantity, Price, and Bulk.
TABLE 6–6: UNARMED ATTACKS
Unarmed
Attack Price Damage Bulk Hands Group Weapon Traits
Fist — 1d4 B — 1 Brawling Agile, finesse, nonlethal, unarmed
TABLE 6–7: MELEE WEAPONS
Simple
Weapons Price Damage Bulk Hands Group Weapon Traits
Club 0 1d6 B 1 1 Club Thrown 10 ft.
Dagger 2 sp 1d4 P L 1 Knife Agile, finesse, thrown 10 ft., versatile S
Gauntlet 2 sp 1d4 B L 1 Brawling Agile, free-hand
Light mace 4 sp 1d4 B L 1 Club Agile, finesse, shove
Longspear 5 sp 1d8 P 2 2 Spear Reach
Mace 1 gp 1d6 B 1 1 Club Shove
Morningstar 1 gp 1d6 B 1 1 Club Versatile P
Sickle 2 sp 1d4 S L 1 Knife Agile, finesse, trip
Spear 1 sp 1d6 P 1 1 Spear Thrown 20 ft.
Spiked gauntlet 3 sp 1d4 P L 1 Brawling Agile, free-hand
Staff 0 1d4 B 1 1 Club Two-hand d8
Uncommon
Simple Weapons Price Damage Bulk Hands Group Weapon Traits
Clan dagger 2 gp 1d4 P L 1 Knife Agile, dwarf, parry, versatile B
Katar 3 sp 1d4 P L 1 Knife Agile, deadly d6, monk
Martial Weapons Price Damage Bulk Hands Group Weapon Traits
Bastard sword 4 gp 1d8 S 1 1 Sword Two-hand d12
Battle axe 1 gp 1d8 S 1 1 Axe Sweep
Bo staff 2 sp 1d8 B 2 2 Club Monk, parry, reach, trip
Falchion 3 gp 1d10 S 2 2 Sword Forceful, sweep
Flail 8 sp 1d6 B 1 1 Flail Disarm, sweep, trip
Glaive 1 gp 1d8 S 2 2 Polearm Deadly d8, forceful, reach
Greataxe 2 gp 1d12 S 2 2 Axe Sweep
Greatclub 1 gp 1d10 B 2 2 Club Backswing, shove
Greatpick 1 gp 1d10 P 2 2 Pick Fatal d12
Greatsword 2 gp 1d12 S 2 2 Sword Versatile P
Guisarme 2 gp 1d10 S 2 2 Polearm Reach, trip
Halberd 2 gp 1d10 P 2 2 Polearm Reach, versatile S
Hatchet 4 sp 1d6 S L 1 Axe Agile, sweep, thrown 10 ft.
Lance 1 gp 1d8 P 2 2 Spear Deadly d8, jousting d6, reach
Core Rulebook
280
Light hammer 3 sp 1d6 B L 1 Hammer Agile, thrown 20 ft.
Light pick 4 sp 1d4 P L 1 Pick Agile, fatal d8
Longsword 1 gp 1d8 S 1 1 Sword Versatile P
Main-gauche 5 sp 1d4 P L 1 Knife Agile, disarm, finesse, parry, versatile S
Maul 3 gp 1d12 B 2 2 Hammer Shove
Pick 7 sp 1d6 P 1 1 Pick Fatal d10
Ranseur 2 gp 1d10 P 2 2 Polearm Disarm, reach
Rapier 2 gp 1d6 P 1 1 Sword Deadly d8, disarm, finesse
Sap 1 sp 1d6 B L 1 Club Agile, nonlethal
Scimitar 1 gp 1d6 S 1 1 Sword Forceful, sweep
Scythe 2 gp 1d10 S 2 2 Polearm Deadly d10, trip
Shield bash — 1d4 B — 1 Shield —
Shield boss 5 sp 1d6 B — 1 Shield Attached to shield
Shield spikes 5 sp 1d6 P — 1 Shield Attached to shield
Shortsword 9 sp 1d6 P L 1 Sword Agile, finesse, versatile S
Starknife 2 gp 1d4 P L 1 Knife Agile, deadly d6, finesse, thrown 20 ft.,
 versatile S
Trident 1 gp 1d8 P 1 1 Spear Thrown 20 ft.
War flail 2 gp 1d10 B 2 2 Flail Disarm, sweep, trip
Warhammer 1 gp 1d8 B 1 1 Hammer Shove
Whip 1 sp 1d4 S 1 1 Flail Disarm, finesse, nonlethal, reach, trip
Uncommon
Martial Weapons Price Damage Bulk Hands Group Weapon Traits
Dogslicer 1 sp 1d6 S L 1 Sword Agile, backstabber, finesse, goblin
Elven curve blade 4 gp 1d8 S 2 2 Sword Elf, finesse, forceful
Filcher’s fork 1 gp 1d4 P L 1 Spear Agile, backstabber, deadly d6, finesse,
 halfling, thrown 20 ft.
Gnome hooked 2 gp 1d6 B 1 1 Hammer Gnome, trip, two-hand d10, versatile P
hammer
Horsechopper 9 sp 1d8 S 2 2 Polearm Goblin, reach, trip, versatile P
Kama 1 gp 1d6 S L 1 Knife Agile, monk, trip
Katana 2 gp 1d6 S 1 1 Sword Deadly d8, two-hand d10, versatile P
Kukri 6 sp 1d6 S L 1 Knife Agile, finesse, trip
Nunchaku 2 sp 1d6 B L 1 Club Backswing, disarm, finesse, monk
Orc knuckle dagger 7 sp 1d6 P L 1 Knife Agile, disarm, orc
Sai 6 sp 1d4 P L 1 Knife Agile, disarm, finesse, monk, versatile B
Spiked chain 3 gp 1d8 S 1 2 Flail Disarm, finesse, trip
Temple sword 2 gp 1d8 S 1 1 Sword Monk, trip
Uncommon
Advanced Weapons Price Damage Bulk Hands Group Weapon Traits
Dwarven waraxe 3 gp 1d8 S 2 1 Axe Dwarf, sweep, two-hand d12
Gnome flickmace 3 gp 1d8 B 2 1 Flail Gnome, reach
Orc necksplitter 2 gp 1d8 S 1 1 Axe Forceful, orc, sweep
Sawtooth saber 5 gp 1d6 S L 1 Sword Agile, finesse, twin
TABLE 6–8: RANGED WEAPONS
Simple Weapons Price Damage Range Reload Bulk Hands Group Weapon Traits
Blowgun 1 sp 1 P 20 ft. 1 L 1 Dart Agile, nonlethal
10 blowgun darts 5 cp L
Crossbow 3 gp 1d8 P 120 ft. 1 1 2 Bow —
10 bolts 1 sp L
Dart 1 cp 1d4 P 20 ft. — L 1 Dart Agile, thrown
Hand crossbow 3 gp 1d6 P 60 ft. 1 L 1 Bow —
10 bolts 1 sp L
Heavy crossbow 4 gp 1d10 P 120 ft. 2 2 2 Bow —
EQUIPMENT 6
281
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
10 bolts 1 sp L
Javelin 1 sp 1d6 P 30 ft. — L 1 Dart Thrown
Sling 0 1d6 B 50 ft. 1 L 1 Sling Propulsive
10 sling bullets 1 cp L
Martial Weapons Price Damage Range Reload Bulk Hands Group Weapon Traits
Alchemical bomb* Varies Varies 20 ft. — L 1 Bomb Varies
Composite longbow 20 gp 1d8 P 100 ft. 0 2 1+ Bow Deadly d10, propulsive,
 volley 30 ft.
10 arrows 1 sp L
Composite shortbow 14 gp 1d6 P 60 ft. 0 1 1+ Bow Deadly d10, propulsive
10 arrows 1 sp L
Longbow 6 gp 1d8 P 100 ft. 0 2 1+ Bow Deadly d10, volley 30 ft.
10 arrows 1 sp L
Shortbow 3 gp 1d6 P 60 ft. 0 1 1+ Bow Deadly d10
10 arrows 1 sp L
Uncommon
Martial Weapons Price Damage Range Reload Bulk Hands Group Weapon Traits
Halfling sling staff 5 gp 1d10 B 80 ft. 1 1 2 Sling Halfling, propulsive
10 sling bullets 1 cp L
Shuriken 1 cp 1d4 P 20 ft. 0 — 1 Dart Agile, monk, thrown
* Statistics for alchemical bombs can be found starting on page 544.
Weapon Traits
Weapons and unarmed attacks with the weapon trait can
have the following traits.
Agile: The multiple attack penalty you take with this
weapon on the second attack on your turn is –4 instead
of –5, and –8 instead of –10 on the third and subsequent
attacks in the turn.
Attached: An attached weapon must be combined with
another piece of gear to be used. The trait lists what type of
item the weapon must be attached to. You must be wielding
or wearing the item the weapon is attached to in order to
attack with it. For example, shield spikes are attached to
a shield, allowing you to attack with the spikes instead of
a shield bash, but only if you’re wielding the shield. An
attached weapon is usually bolted onto or built into the
item it’s attached to, and typically an item can have only one
weapon attached to it. An attached weapon can be affixed
to an item with 10 minutes of work and a successful DC 10
Crafting check; this includes the time needed to remove
the weapon from a previous item, if necessary. If an item
is destroyed, its attached weapon can usually be salvaged.
Backstabber: When you hit a flat-footed creature,
this weapon deals 1 precision damage in addition to its
normal damage. The precision damage increases to 2 if
the weapon is a +3 weapon.
Backswing: You can use the momentum from a missed
attack with this weapon to lead into your next attack.
After missing with this weapon on your turn, you gain
a +1 circumstance bonus to your next attack with this
weapon before the end of your turn.
Deadly: On a critical hit, the weapon adds a weapon
damage die of the listed size. Roll this after doubling the
weapon’s damage. This increases to two dice if the weapon
has a greater striking rune and three dice if the weapon has
a major striking rune. For instance, a rapier with a greater
striking rune deals 2d8 extra piercing damage on a critical
hit. An ability that changes the size of the weapon’s normal
damage dice doesn’t change the size of its deadly die.
Disarm: You can use this weapon to Disarm with the
Athletics skill even if you don’t have a free hand. This uses
the weapon’s reach (if different from your own) and adds
the weapon’s item bonus to attack rolls (if any) as an item
bonus to the Athletics check. If you critically fail a check to
Disarm using the weapon, you can drop the weapon to take
the effects of a failure instead of a critical failure. On a critical
success, you still need a free hand if you want to take the item.
Dwarf: Dwarves craft and use these weapons.
Elf: Elves craft and use these weapons.
Fatal: The fatal trait includes a die size. On a critical
hit, the weapon’s damage die increases to that die size
instead of the normal die size, and the weapon adds one
additional damage die of the listed size.
Finesse: You can use your Dexterity modifier instead
of your Strength modifier on attack rolls using this
melee weapon. You still use your Strength modifier when
calculating damage.
Forceful: This weapon becomes more dangerous as you
build momentum. When you attack with it more than once
on your turn, the second attack gains a circumstance bonus
to damage equal to the number of weapon damage dice,
and each subsequent attack gains a circumstance bonus to
damage equal to double the number of weapon damage dice.
Free-Hand: This weapon doesn’t take up your hand,
usually because it is built into your armor. A free-hand
weapon can’t be Disarmed. You can use the hand covered
by your free-hand weapon to wield other items, perform
manipulate actions, and so on. You can’t attack with a
free-hand weapon if you’re wielding anything in that hand
Core Rulebook
282
or otherwise using that hand. When you’re not wielding
anything and not otherwise using the hand, you can use
abilities that require you to have a hand free as well as those
that require you to be wielding a weapon in that hand. Each
of your hands can have only one free‑hand weapon on it.
Gnome: Gnomes craft and use these weapons.
Goblin: Goblins craft and use these weapons.
Grapple: You can use this weapon to Grapple with the
Athletics skill even if you don’t have a free hand. This
uses the weapon’s reach (if different from your own) and
adds the weapon’s item bonus to attack rolls as an item
bonus to the Athletics check. If you critically fail a check
to Grapple using the weapon, you can drop the weapon
to take the effects of a failure instead of a critical failure.
Halfling: Halflings craft and use these weapons.
Jousting: The weapon is suited for mounted combat
with a harness or similar means. When mounted, if you
moved at least 10 feet on the action before your attack,
add a circumstance bonus to damage for that attack
equal to the number of damage dice for the weapon. In
addition, while mounted, you can wield the weapon in
one hand, changing the damage die to the listed value.
Monk: Many monks learn to use these weapons.
Nonlethal: Attacks with this weapon are nonlethal
(page 453), and are used to knock creatures unconscious
instead of kill them. You can use a nonlethal weapon to
make a lethal attack with a –2 circumstance penalty.
Orc: Orcs craft and use these weapons.
Parry: This weapon can be used defensively to block
attacks. While wielding this weapon, if your proficiency
with it is trained or better, you can spend an Interact
action to position your weapon defensively, gaining a +1
circumstance bonus to AC until the start of your next turn.
Propulsive: You add half your Strength modifier
(if positive) to damage rolls with a propulsive ranged
weapon. If you have a negative Strength modifier, you
add your full Strength modifier instead.
Reach: This weapon is long and can be used to attack
creatures up to 10 feet away instead of only adjacent
creatures. For creatures that already have reach with
the limb or limbs that wield the weapon, the weapon
increases their reach by 5 feet.
Shove: You can use this weapon to Shove with the
Athletics skill even if you don’t have a free hand. This
uses the weapon’s reach (if different from your own) and
adds the weapon’s item bonus to attack rolls as an item
bonus to the Athletics check. If you critically fail a check
to Shove using the weapon, you can drop the weapon to
take the effects of a failure instead of a critical failure.
Sweep: This weapon makes wide sweeping or spinning
attacks, making it easier to attack multiple enemies. When
you attack with this weapon, you gain a +1 circumstance
bonus to your attack roll if you already attempted to
attack a different target this turn using this weapon.
Thrown: You can throw this weapon as a ranged
attack. A thrown weapon adds your Strength modifier to
damage just like a melee weapon does. When this trait
appears on a melee weapon, it also includes the range
increment. Ranged weapons with this trait use the range
increment specified in the weapon’s Range entry.
Trip: You can use this weapon to Trip with the Athletics
skill even if you don’t have a free hand. This uses the
weapon’s reach (if different from your own) and adds the
weapon’s item bonus to attack rolls as an item bonus to
the Athletics check. If you critically fail a check to Trip
using the weapon, you can drop the weapon to take the
effects of a failure instead of a critical failure.
Twin: These weapons are used as a pair, complementing
each other. When you attack with a twin weapon, you
add a circumstance bonus to the damage roll equal to the
weapon’s number of damage dice if you have previously
attacked with a different weapon of the same type this
turn. The weapons must be of the same type to benefit
from this trait, but they don’t need to have the same runes.
Two-Hand: This weapon can be wielded with two
hands. Doing so changes its weapon damage die to the
indicated value. This change applies to all the weapon’s
damage dice, such as those from striking runes.
Unarmed: An unarmed attack uses your body rather
than a manufactured weapon. An unarmed attack isn’t a
weapon, though it’s categorized with weapons for weapon
groups, and it might have weapon traits. Since it’s part of
your body, an unarmed attack can’t be Disarmed. It also
doesn’t take up a hand, though a fist or other grasping
appendage follows the same rules as a free-hand weapon.
Versatile: A versatile weapon can be used to deal a
different type of damage than that listed in the Damage
entry. This trait indicates the alternate damage type. For
instance, a piercing weapon that is versatile S can be
used to deal piercing or slashing damage. You choose the
damage type each time you make an attack.
Volley: This ranged weapon is less effective at close
distances. Your attacks against targets that are at a
distance within the range listed take a –2 penalty.
Critical Specialization
Effects
Certain feats, class features, weapon runes, and other
effects can grant you additional benefits when you make
an attack with certain weapons and get a critical success.
This is called a critical specialization effect. The exact
effect depends on which weapon group your weapon
belongs to, as listed below. You can always decide not to
add the critical specialization effect of your weapon.
Axe: Choose one creature adjacent to the initial target
and within reach. If its AC is lower than your attack roll
result for the critical hit, you deal damage to that creature
equal to the result of the weapon damage die you rolled
(including extra dice for its potency rune, if any). This
amount isn’t doubled, and no bonuses or other additional
dice apply to this damage.
EQUIPMENT 6
283
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Bomb: Increase the radius of the bomb’s splash damage
(if any) to 10 feet.
Bow: If the target of the critical hit is adjacent
to a surface, it gets stuck to that surface by the
missile. The target is immobilized and must spend
an Interact action to attempt a DC 10 Athletics
check to pull the missile free; it can’t move from its
space until it succeeds. The creature doesn’t become
stuck if it is incorporeal, is liquid (like a water elemental
or some oozes), or could otherwise escape without effort.
Brawling: The target must succeed at a Fortitude save
against your class DC or be slowed 1 until the end of
your next turn.
Club: You knock the target away from you up to 10
feet (you choose the distance). This is forced movement
(page 475).
Dart: The target takes 1d6 persistent bleed damage.
You gain an item bonus to this bleed damage equal to
the weapon’s item bonus to attack rolls.
Flail: The target is knocked prone.
Hammer: The target is knocked prone.
Knife: The target takes 1d6 persistent bleed
damage. You gain an item bonus to this bleed damage
equal to the weapon’s item bonus to attack rolls.
Pick: The weapon viciously pierces the target, who
takes 2 additional damage per weapon damage die.
Polearm: The target is moved 5 feet in a direction
of your choice. This is forced movement (page 475).
Shield: You knock the target back from you 5 feet.
This is forced movement (page 475).
Sling: The target must succeed at a Fortitude save
against your class DC or be stunned 1.
Spear: The weapon pierces the target, weakening its
attacks. The target is clumsy 1 until the start of your
next turn.
Sword: The target is made off-balance by your
attack, becoming flat-footed until the start of your
next turn.
Weapon Descriptions
Each of the weapons listed in Tables 6–7 and 6–8 are
described below.
Alchemical Bomb: These bombs come in a variety
of types and levels of power, but no matter the variety,
you throw the bomb at the target and it explodes,
unleashing its alchemical blast.
Arrow: These projectiles are the ammunition for
bows. The shaft of an arrow is made of wood. It is
stabilized in flight by fletching at one end and bears a
metal head on the other.
Bastard Sword: This broad-bladed sword,
sometimes called the hand‑and‑a‑half sword, has a
longer grip so it can be held in one hand or used with
two hands to provide extra piercing or slashing power.
Battle Axe: These axes are designed explicitly as
weapons, rather than tools. They typically weigh less, with
a shaft reinforced with metal bands or bolts, and have
a sharper blade, making them ideal for chopping limbs
rather than wood.
Bolt: Shorter than traditional arrows but similar in
construction, bolts are the ammunition used by crossbows.
Blowgun: This long, narrow tube is used for shooting
blowgun darts, using only the power of a forcefully
exhaled breath.
Blowgun Dart: These thin, light darts are typically
made of hardwood and stabilized with fletching of
down or fur. They are often hollow so they can be
used to deliver poison.
Bo Staff: This strong but slender staff is tapered
at the ends and well balanced. It’s designed to be
an offensive and defensive weapon.
Clan Dagger: This broad dagger is carried by dwarves
as a weapon, tool, and designation of clan. Losing or
having to surrender a clan dagger is considered a mark
of embarrassment to most dwarves.
Club: This is a piece of stout wood shaped or
repurposed to bludgeon an enemy. Clubs can be
intricately carved pieces of martial art or as simple as
a tree branch or piece of wood.
Composite Longbow: This projectile weapon
is made from horn, wood, and sinew laminated
together to increase the power of its pull and the
force of its projectile. Like all longbows, its great size
also increases the bow’s range and power. You must
use two hands to fire it, and it cannot be used while
mounted. Any time an ability is specifically restricted
to a longbow, such as Erastil’s favored weapon, it also
applies to composite longbows unless otherwise stated.
Composite Shortbow: This shortbow is made from horn,
wood, and sinew laminated together to increase the power
of its pull and the force of its projectile. Its compact size and
power make it a favorite of mounted archers. Any time an
ability is specifically restricted to a shortbow, it also applies
to composite shortbows unless otherwise stated.
Crossbow: This ranged weapon has a bow-like
assembly mounted on a handled frame called a tiller.
The tiller has a mechanism to lock the bowstring in
place, attached to a trigger mechanism that releases
the tension and launches a bolt.
Dagger: This small, bladed weapon is held in one
hand and used to stab a creature in close combat. It
can also be thrown.
Dart: This thrown weapon is larger than an
arrow but shorter than a javelin. It typically has
a short shaft of wood ending in a metal tip and is
sometimes stabilized by feathers or fur.
Dogslicer: This short, curved, and crude makeshift
blade often has holes drilled into it to reduce its weight.
It’s a favored weapon of goblins.
Dwarven Waraxe: This favored weapon of the dwarves
has a large, ornate head mounted on a thick handle. This
powerful axe can be wielded with one hand or two.
Core Rulebook
284
Elven Curve Blade: Essentially a longer version
of the scimitar, this traditional elven weapon
has a thinner blade than its cousin.
Falchion: This weapon is a heavier,
two‑handed version of the curved-bladed
scimitar. It is weighted toward the blade’s
end, making it a powerful slashing weapon.
Filcher’s Fork: This halfling weapon looks like a
long, two-pronged fork and is used as both a weapon
and a cooking implement.
Flail: This weapon consists of a wooden handle
attached to a spiked ball or cylinder by a chain, rope, or
strap of leather.
Gauntlet: A pair of these metal gloves comes with
full plate, half plate, and splint armor; they can also
be purchased separately and worn with other types
of armor. They not only protect your hands but also
transform your hands into lethal weapons.
Glaive: This polearm consists of a long,
single-edged blade on the end of a 7-foot
pole. It is extremely effective at delivering
lethal cuts at a distance.
Gnome Flickmace: More a flail than
a mace, this weapon has a short handle
attached to a length of chain with a ball at the
end. The ball is propelled to its reach with the flick of
the wrist, the momentum of which brings the ball back
to the wielder after the strike.
Gnome Hooked Hammer: This gnome tool and
weapon features a hammer at one end and a curved
pick on the other. It’s such a strange and awkward
weapon that others think the gnomes are slightly
erratic for using it.
Greataxe: This large battle axe is too heavy to
wield with only one hand. Many greataxes
incorporate two blades, and they are often
“bearded,” having a hook at the bottom to
increase the strength of their chopping power.
Greatclub: While many greatclubs are
intricately carved, others are little more than
a sturdy tree branch. These massive clubs are too
heavy to wield with only one hand.
Greatpick: This pick has a longer handle and
broader head than a regular pick. It is too heavy to
wield in one hand.
Greatsword: This immense two-handed sword is
nearly as tall as its wielder. Its lower blade is often
somewhat dulled to allow it to be gripped for extra
leverage in close-quarter fights.
Guisarme: This polearm bears a long, often one‑sided,
curved blade with a hook protruding from the blunt
side of the blade, which can allow its wielder to trip
opponents at a distance. Its shaft is usually 8 feet long.
Halberd: This polearm has a relatively short,
5-foot shaft. The business end is a long spike with an
axe blade attached.
Halfling Sling Staff: This staff ends in a
Y-shaped split that cradles a sling. The length of
the staff provides excellent leverage when used
two‑handed to fling rocks or bullets from the sling.
Hand Crossbow: Sometimes referred to as an alley
bow by rogues or ruffians, this small crossbow fires small
bolts that are sometimes used to deliver poison to the
target. It’s small enough to be shot one-handed, but it still
requires two hands to load.
Hatchet: This small axe can be used in close combat
or thrown.
Heavy Crossbow: This large crossbow is harder to
load and more substantial than a regular crossbow, but
it packs a greater punch.
Horsechopper: Created by goblins to battle
horses, this weapon is essentially a long shaft ending
in a blade with a large hook.
Javelin: This thin spear is well balanced for
throwing but is not designed for melee use.
Kama: Similar to a sickle and used in some
regions to reap grain, a kama has a short,
slightly curved blade and a wooden handle.
Katana: A katana is a curved, single-edged
sword known for its wickedly sharped blade.
Katar: Also known as punching daggers, katars
are characterized by their H-shaped hand grip that allows
the blade to jut out from the knuckles.
Kukri: The blade of this foot-long knife curves inward
and lacks a cross guard at the hilt.
Lance: This spear-like weapon is used by a mounted
creature to deal a great deal of damage.
Light Hammer: This smaller version of the warhammer
has a wooden or metal shaft ending in a metal head.
Unlike its heavier cousin, it is light enough to throw.
Light Mace: A light mace has a short wooden or
metal shaft ending with a dense metal head. Used
much like a club, it delivers heavy bludgeoning
blows, but with extra power derived from the
head’s metal ridges or spikes.
Light Pick: A light pick is a modified mining implement
with a wooden shaft ending in a pick head crafted more
to pierce armor and flesh than chip rocks.
Longbow: This 5-foot-tall bow, usually made of a
single piece of elm, hickory, or yew, has a powerful
draw and is excellent at propelling arrows with
great force and at an extreme distance. You must
use two hands to fire a longbow, and it can’t be used
while mounted.
Longspear: This very long spear, sometimes called a
pike, is purely for thrusting rather than throwing. Used
by many soldiers and city watch for crowd control and
defense against charging enemies, it must be wielded
with two hands.
Longsword: Longswords can be one-edged or
two‑edged swords. Their blades are heavy and they’re
between 3 and 4 feet in length.
EQUIPMENT 6
285
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Shortbow: This smaller bow is made of a single piece
of wood and favored by skirmishers and cavalry.
Shortsword: These blades come in a variety of shapes
and styles, but they are typically 2 feet long.
Shuriken: This “throwing star” is a small piece of flat
metal with sharp edges, designed to be flung with a flick
of the wrist.
Sickle: Originally a farming tool used for reaping
grain, this one-handed weapon has a short wooden
handle ending in a curved blade, sometimes sharpened
on both sides.
Sling: Little more than a leather cup attached
to a pair of straps, a sling can be used to fling
smooth stones or sling bullets at a range.
Sling Bullet: These are small metal balls,
typically either iron or lead, designed to be used
as ammunition in slings.
Spear: A long metal shaft ending with a metal
spike, a spear can be used one-handed as a melee
weapon and can be thrown.
Spiked Chain: This 4‑foot‑long length of chain is
covered with barbs and has spikes on one or both ends.
Some feature metal hoops used as handgrips.
Spiked Gauntlet: Providing the same defensive
function as a standard gauntlet, this version has a
group of spikes protruding from the knuckles to
deliver piercing damage with a punch.
Staff: This long piece of wood can aid in walking
and deliver a mighty blow.
Starknife: From a central metal ring, four
tapering metal blades extend like points on
a compass rose. When gripping a starknife
from the center, the wielder can use it as a melee
weapon. It can also be thrown short distances.
Temple Sword: This heavy blade is favored by
guardians of religious sites. It has a distinctive,
crescent-shaped blade that seems to be a mix of a
sickle and sword. It often has holes drilled into
the blade or the pommel so that bells or other
holy trinkets can be affixed to the weapon as
an aid for prayer or mediation.
Trident: This three-pronged, spear-like weapon
typically has a 4-foot shaft. Like a spear, it can be
wielded with one hand or thrown.
War Flail: This large flail has a long shaft
connected to a shorter piece of stout wood
or metal that’s sometimes inlaid with spikes.
Warhammer: This weapon has a wooden
shaft ending in a large, heavy metal head. The
head of the hammer might be single-sided
or double-sided, but it’s always capable of
delivering powerful bludgeoning blows.
Whip: This long strand of thick leather,
often braided, delivers a painful but nonlethal
slash at a distance, usually accompanied by a
distinctive cracking sound.
Mace: With a stout haft and a heavy metal head, a
mace is sturdy and allows its wielder to deliver powerful
blows and dent armor.
Main-Gauche: This parrying dagger features a robust
guard to protect the wielder’s hand.
Maul: Mauls are massive warhammers that must be
swung with two hands.
Morningstar: This weapon has a short shaft ending in
a metal ball studded with spikes.
Nunchaku: The nunchaku is constructed of two
wooden or metal bars connected by a short length of
rope or chain.
Orc Knuckle Dagger: This stout, metal
blade of orc design has a horizontal basket
hilt with blades jutting from each end, or sometimes
one blade like that of a katar.
Orc Necksplitter: This single-bladed bearded axe has
a jagged blade that’s perfect for separating bone from
tendon and cartilage.
Pick: A pick designed solely for combat
has a sturdy wooden shaft and a heavy,
pointed head to deliver devastating blows.
Ranseur: This polearm is a long trident with
a central prong that’s longer than the other two.
Rapier: The rapier is a long and thin piercing
blade with a basket hilt. It is prized among many
as a dueling weapon.
Sai: This piercing dagger is a metal spike flanked by a
pair of prongs that can be used to trap an enemy’s weapon.
Sap: A sap has a soft wrapping around a
dense core, typically a leather sheath around
a lead rod. Its head is wider than its grip to
disperse the force of a blow, as the weapon’s
purpose is to knock out its victim rather than to
draw blood.
Sawtooth Saber: The signature weapon of the
Red Mantis assassins, this curved blade is serrated
like a saw, hence the name.
Scimitar: This one-handed curved blade is
sharp on one side.
Scythe: Derived from a farming tool used
to mow down long grains and cereals, this weapon has
a long wooden shaft with protruding handles, capped
with a curved blade set at a right angle.
Shield Bash: A shield bash is not actually a
weapon, but a maneuver in which you thrust or
swing your shield to hit your foe with an
impromptu attack.
Shield Boss: Typically a round,
convex, or conical piece of thick metal
attached to the center of a shield, a
shield boss increases the bludgeoning damage of a
shield bash.
Shield Spikes: These metal spikes are strategically
placed on the defensive side of the shield to deal
piercing damage with a shield bash.
Core Rulebook
286
Gear Statistics
Tables 6–9 and 6–10 list Price and Bulk entries for a
wide variety of gear. Any item with a number after it
in parentheses indicates that the item’s Price is for the
indicated quantity, though the Bulk entry for such an
item is the value for only one such item. All items in this
chapter are level 0 unless the item name is followed by a
higher item level in parentheses.
Hands
This lists how many hands it takes to use
the item effectively. Most items that require
two hands can be carried in only one hand,
but you must spend an Interact action
to change your grip in order to use
the item. The GM may determine
that an item is too big to carry in one hand (or
even two hands, for particularly large items).
Gear
Your character needs all sorts of items both while exploring and in downtime, ranging
from rations to climbing gear to fancy clothing, depending on the situation.
Adventuring Gear
These items follow special rules or require more detail.
Adventurer’s Pack: This item is the starter kit for an
adventurer, containing the essential items for exploration
and survival. The Bulk value is for the entire pack together,
but see the descriptions of individual items as necessary.
The pack contains the following items: backpack
(containing the other goods), bedroll, two belt pouches,
10 pieces of chalk, flint and steel, 50 feet of rope, 2 weeks’
rations, soap, 5 torches, and a waterskin.
Alchemist’s Tools: These beakers and chemicals can be
used to set up a mobile alchemical laboratory. Expanded
alchemist’s tools give a +1 item bonus to Crafting checks
to create alchemical items. When you carry the tools from
place to place, you keep many of the components handy
on your person, in pockets or bandoliers.
Artisan’s Tools: You need these tools to create items
from raw materials with the Craft skill. Sterling artisan’s
tools give you a +1 item bonus to the check. Different
sets are needed for different work, as determined by
the GM; for example, blacksmith’s tools differ from
woodworker’s tools.
Backpack: A backpack holds up to 4 Bulk of items. If
you’re carrying or stowing the pack rather than wearing
it on your back, its bulk is light instead of negligible.
Bandolier: A bandolier holds up to eight items of light
Bulk within easy reach and is usually used for alchemical
items or potions. If you are carrying or stowing a bandolier
rather than wearing it around your chest, it has light Bulk
instead of negligible. A bandolier can be dedicated to a full
set of tools, such as healer’s tools, allowing you to draw the
tools as part of the action that requires them.
Basic Crafter’s Book: This book contains the formulas
(page 293) for Crafting the common items in this chapter.
Belt Pouch: A belt pouch holds up to four items of
light Bulk.
Caltrops: These four-pronged metal spikes can cause
damage to a creature’s feet. You can scatter caltrops in an
empty square adjacent to you with an
Interact action. The first creature that
moves into that square must succeed
at a DC 14 Acrobatics check or take
1d4 piercing damage and 1 persistent
bleed damage. A creature taking
persistent bleed damage from
caltrops takes a –5-foot penalty
to its Speed. Spending an Interact action to
pluck the caltrops free reduces the DC to
stop the bleeding. Once a creature takes
damage from caltrops, enough caltrops
are ruined that other creatures moving into
the square are safe.
Deployed caltrops can be salvaged and
reused if no creatures took damage from them. Otherwise,
enough caltrops are ruined that they can’t be salvaged.
Candle: A lit candle sheds dim light in a 10-foot radius.
Chest: A wooden chest can hold up to 8 Bulk of items.
Climbing Kit: This satchel includes 50 feet of rope,
pulleys, a dozen pitons, a hammer, a grappling hook, and
one set of crampons. Climbing kits allow you to attach
yourself to the wall you’re Climbing, moving half as quickly
as usual (minimum 5 feet) but letting you attempt a DC 5
flat check whenever you critically fail to prevent a fall. You
gain a +1 item bonus to Athletics checks to Climb while
using an extreme climbing kit. A single kit has only enough
materials for one climber; each climber needs their own kit.
Clothing: Ordinary clothing is functional with basic
tailoring, such as peasant garb, monk’s robes, or work clothes.
Explorer’s clothing is sturdy enough that it can be
reinforced to protect you, even though it isn’t a suit of
armor. It comes in many forms, though the most common
sorts look like clerical vestments, monk’s garments,
or wizard’s robes, as members of all three classes are
likely to avoid wearing armor. For more information on
explorer’s clothing, see pages 275–276.
Fine clothing, suitable for a noble or royal, is made with
expensive fabrics, precious metals, and intricate patterns.
You gain a +1 item bonus to checks to Make an Impression
on nobility or other upper-class folk while wearing highfashion fine clothing.
EQUIPMENT 6
287
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Item Price Bulk Hands
Adventurer’s pack 7 sp 2 —
Alchemist’s tools 5 gp 2 2
Expanded alchemist’s tools (level 3) 55 gp 2 2
Artisan’s tools 4 gp 2 2
Sterling artisan’s tools (level 3) 50 gp 2 2
Backpack 1 sp — —
Bandolier 1 sp — —
Basic crafter’s book 1 sp L 2
Bedroll 1 cp L —
Belt pouch 4 cp — —
Caltrops 3 sp L 1
Candle (10) 1 cp — 1
Chain (10 feet) 4 gp 1 2
Chalk (10) 1 cp — 1
Chest 6 sp 2 2
Climbing kit 5 sp 1 2
Extreme climbing kit (level 3) 40 gp 1 2
Clothing
Ordinary 1 sp — —
Explorer’s 1 sp L —
Fine 2 gp L —
High-fashion fine (level 3) 55 gp L —
Winter 4 sp L —
Compass 1 gp — 1
Lensatic compass (level 3) 20 gp — 1
Cookware 1 gp 2 2
Crowbar 5 sp L 2
Levered crowbar (level 3) 20 gp L 2
Disguise kit 2 gp L 2
Replacement cosmetics 1 sp — —
Elite disguise kit (level 3) 40 gp L 2
Elite cosmetics (level 3) 5 sp — —
Fishing tackle 8 sp 1 2
Professional fishing tackle (level 3) 20 gp 1 2
Flint and steel 5 cp — 2
Formula book (blank) 1 gp 1 1
Grappling hook 1 sp L 1
Hammer 1 sp L 1
Healer’s tools 5 gp 1 2
Expanded healer’s tools (level 3) 50 gp 1 2
Holly and mistletoe 0 — 1
Hourglass 3 gp L 1
Ladder (10-foot) 3 cp 3 2
Lantern
Bull’s-eye 1 gp 1 1
Hooded 7 sp L 1
Lock
Poor lock (level 0) 2 sp — 2
Simple lock (level 1) 2 gp — 2
Average lock (level 3) 15 gp — 2
Good lock (level 9) 200 gp — 2
Superior lock (level 17) 4,500 gp — 2
Magnifying glass (level 3) 40 gp — 1
Manacles
Poor manacles (level 0) 3 sp — 2
Simple manacles (level 1) 3 gp — 2
Average manacles (level 3) 20 gp — 2
Good manacles (level 9) 250 gp — 2
Item Price Bulk Hands
Superior manacles (level 17) 5,000 gp — 2
Material component pouch 5 sp L 1
Merchant’s scale 2 sp L 2
Mirror 1 gp — 1
Mug 1 cp — 1
Musical instrument
Handheld 8 sp 1 2
Virtuoso handheld (level 3) 50 gp 1 2
Heavy 2 gp 16 2
Virtuoso heavy (level 3) 100 gp 16 2
Oil (1 pint) 1 cp — 2
Piton 1 cp — 1
Rations (1 week) 4 sp L 1
Religious symbol
Wooden 1 sp L 1
Silver 2 gp L 1
Religious text 1 gp L 1
Repair kit 2 gp 1 2
Superb repair kit (level 3) 25 gp 1 2
Rope 5 sp L 2
Sack (5) 1 cp L 1
Saddlebags 2 sp L 2
Satchel 1 sp — 2
Scroll case 1 sp — 2
Sheath 1 cp — —
Signal whistle 8 cp — 1
Snare kit 5 gp 2 2
Specialist snare kit (level 3) 55 gp 2 2
Soap 2 cp — 1
Spellbook (blank) 1 gp 1 1
Spyglass 20 gp L 2
Fine spyglass (level 4) 80 gp L 2
Tack 4 gp 1 —
Ten-foot pole 1 cp 1 2
Tent
Pup 8 sp L 2
Four-person 5 gp 1 2
Pavilion (level 2) 40 gp 12 2
Thieves’ tools 3 gp L 2
Replacement picks 3 sp — —
Infiltrator thieves’ tools (level 3) 50 gp L 2
Infiltrator picks (level 3) 3 gp — —
Tool
Long tool 1 gp 1 2
Short tool 4 sp L 1 or 2
Torch 1 cp L 1
Vial 5 cp — 1
Waterskin 5 cp L 1
Writing set 1 gp L 2
Extra ink and paper 1 sp — —
TABLE 6–10: UNCOMMON ADVENTURING GEAR
Item Price Bulk Hands
Scholarly journal (level 3) 6 gp L 1
Scholarly journal compendium (level 3) 30 gp L 2
Survey map (level 3) 10 gp L 1
Survey map atlas (level 3) 50 gp L 2
TABLE 6–9: ADVENTURING GEAR
Core Rulebook
288
Class Kits
If you want to quickly decide how to spend your starting
money on what your class needs, start with one of these kits.
Note than an adventurer’s pack, which is included in each kit,
contains a backpack, a bedroll, two belt pouches, 10 pieces of
chalk, flint and steel, 50 feet of rope, 2 weeks’ rations, soap,
5 torches, and a waterskin.
Alchemist
Price 9 gp, 6 sp; Bulk 4 Bulk, 6 light; 
Money Left Over 5 gp, 4 sp
Armor studded leather armor
Weapons dagger, sling with 20 sling bullets
Gear adventurer’s pack, alchemist’s tools, bandolier, basic
crafter’s book, 2 sets of caltrops, sheath
Options repair kit (2 gp)
Barbarian
Price 3 gp, 2 sp; Bulk 3 Bulk, 5 light; 
Money Left Over 11 gp, 8 sp
Armor hide armor
Weapons 4 javelins
Gear adventurer’s pack, grappling hook, 2 sheaths
Options greataxe (2 gp), greatclub (1 gp), greatsword
(2 gp), or battle axe and steel shield (3 gp)
Bard
Price 6 gp, 8 sp; Bulk 4 Bulk, 3 light; 
Money Left Over 8 gp, 2 sp
Armor studded leather armor
Weapons dagger, rapier, sling with 20 sling bullets
Gear adventurer’s pack, bandolier, handheld
instrument, sheath
Champion
Price 3 gp, 8 sp; Bulk 3 Bulk, 7 light; 
Money Left Over 11 gp, 2 sp
Armor hide armor
Weapons dagger, 4 javelins
Gear adventurer’s pack, crowbar, grappling hook, sheath
Options your deity’s favored weapon (see the deity entries
on pages 437–441; use the Price listed in this chapter)
Cleric
Price 1 gp 5 sp; Bulk 1 Bulk, 3 light; 
Money Left Over 13 gp
Gear adventurer’s pack, bandolier,
2 sets of caltrops, religious symbol (wooden)
Options your deity’s favored weapon (see the
deity entries on pages 437–441; use the Price
listed in this chapter), hide armor (2 gp)
Druid
Price 3 gp, 7 sp; Bulk 4 Bulk, 4 light; 
Money Left Over 11 gp, 3 sp
Armor leather armor
Weapons 4 javelins, longspear
Gear adventurer’s pack, bandolier, holly and mistletoe
Options healer’s tools (5 gp)
Fighter
Price 3 gp; Bulk 3 Bulk, 2 light; Money
Left Over 12 gp
Armor hide armor
Weapons dagger
Gear adventurer’s pack, grappling hook, sheath
Options greatsword (2 gp), longbow with 20 arrows
(6 gp, 2 sp), or longsword and steel shield (3 gp)
Monk
Price 4 gp, 9 sp; Bulk 4 Bulk, 2 light; 
Money Left Over 10 gp, 2 sp
Weapons longspear, staff
Gear adventurer’s pack, bandolier, climbing kit,
grappling hook, lesser smokestick
Ranger
Price 9 gp, 1 sp; Bulk 3 Bulk, 3 light; 
Money Left Over 5 gp, 9 sp
Armor leather armor
Weapons dagger, longbow with 20 arrows
Gear adventurer’s pack, sheath
Rogue
Price 5 gp, 4 sp; Bulk 4 Bulk, 1 light; 
Money Left Over 9 gp, 6 sp
Armor leather armor
Weapons dagger, rapier
Gear adventurer’s pack, climbing kit, sheath
Options thieves’ tools (3 gp)
Sorcerer
Price 1 gp, 6 sp; Bulk 1 Bulk, 6 light; 
Money Left Over 12 gp, 9 sp
Weapons dagger, slingshot with 20
sling bullets
Gear adventurer’s pack, bandolier, 2 sets of caltrops, sheath
Wizard
Price 1 gp, 2 sp; Bulk 2 Bulk, 2 light; 
Money Left Over 11 gp, 8 sp
Weapons staff
Gear adventurer’s pack, material component pouch, writing set
Options crossbow with 20 bolts (3 gp, 2 sp)
EQUIPMENT 6
289
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Winter clothing allows you to negate the damage from
severe environmental cold and reduce the damage from
extreme cold to that of severe cold.
Compass: A compass helps you Sense Direction or
navigate, provided you’re in  a location with uniform
magnetic fields. Without a compass, you take a –2 item
penalty to these checks (similar to using a shoddy item).
A lensatic compass gives you a +1
item bonus to these checks.
Crowbar: When Forcing Open
an object that doesn’t have an
easy grip, a crowbar makes
it easier to gain the necessary
leverage. Without a crowbar,
prying something open takes a
–2 item penalty to the Athletics
check to Force Open (similar to
using a shoddy item). A levered
crowbar grants you a +1 item bonus
to Athletics checks to Force Open
anything that can be pried open.
Disguise Kit: This small wooden box contains
cosmetics, false facial hair, spirit gum, and a few simple
wigs. You usually need a disguise kit to set up a disguise in
order to Impersonate someone using the Deception skill.
An elite disguise kit adds a +1 item bonus to relevant
checks. If you’ve crafted a large number of disguises, you
can replenish your cosmetics supply with replacement
cosmetics suitable for the type of your disguise kit.
Fishing Tackle: This kit include a collapsible fishing
pole, fishhooks, line, lures, and a fishing net. Professional
fishing tackle grants a +1 item bonus to checks to fish.
Flint and Steel: Flint and steel are useful in creating a
fire if you have the time to catch a spark, though using
them is typically too time-consuming to be practical
during an encounter. Even in ideal conditions, using flint
and steel to light a flame requires using at least 3 actions,
and often significantly longer.
Formula Book: A formula book holds the formulas
necessary to make items other than the common
equipment from this chapter; alchemists typically get one
for free. Each formula book can hold the formulas for
up to 100 different items. Formulas can also appear on
parchment sheets, tablets, and almost any other medium;
there’s no need for you to copy them into a specific book
as long as you can keep them on hand to reference them.
Grappling Hook: You can throw a grappling hook
with a rope tied to it to make a climb easier. To anchor a
grappling hook, make an attack roll with the secret trait
against a DC depending on the target, typically at least
DC 20. On a success, your hook has a firm hold, but
on a critical failure, the hook seems like it will hold but
actually falls when you’re partway up.
Healer’s Tools: This kit of bandages, herbs, and suturing
tools is necessary for Medicine checks to Administer
First Aid, Treat Disease, Treat Poison, or Treat Wounds.
Expanded healer’s tools provide a +1 item bonus to such
checks. When you carry the tools from place to place, you
keep many of the components handy on your person, in
pockets or bandoliers.
Holly and Mistletoe: Plants of supernatural significance
provide a primal focus for primal
spellcasters, such as druids, when using
certain abilities and casting some spells.
A bundle of holly and mistletoe must
be held in one hand to use it. Other
primal foci exist for druids focused
on other aspects of nature.
Lantern: A lantern sheds
bright light and requires 1 pint
of oil to function for 6 hours.
A bull’s-eye lantern emits its
light in a 60‑foot cone (and
dim light in the next 60 feet).
A hooded lantern sheds light
in a 30‑foot radius (and dim light
in the next 30 feet) and is equipped
with shutters, which you can close to block the light.
Closing or opening the shutters takes an Interact action.
Lock: Picking a poor lock requires two successful DC
15 Thievery checks, a simple lock requires three successful
DC  20 Thievery checks, an average lock requires four
successes at DC 25, a good lock requires five successes at
DC 30, and a superior lock six successes at DC 40.
Magnifying Glass: This quality handheld lens gives you
a +1 item bonus to Perception checks to notice minute
details of documents, fabric, and the like.
Manacles: You can manacle someone who is willing or
otherwise at your mercy as an exploration activity taking
10–30 seconds depending on the creature’s size and how
many manacles you apply. A two-legged creature with its
legs bound takes a –15-foot circumstance penalty to its
Speeds, and a two-handed creature with its wrists bound
has to succeed at a DC 5 flat check any time it uses a
manipulate action or else that action fails. This DC may
be higher depending on how tightly the manacles constrain
the hands. A creature bound to a stationary object is
immobilized. For creatures with more or fewer limbs, the
GM determines what effect manacles have, if any. Freeing
a creature from poor manacles requires two successful
DC 17 Thievery checks, simple manacles requires three
successes at DC 22, average manacles require four successes
at DC 27, good manacles require five successes at DC 32,
and superior manacles require six successes at DC 42.
Material Component Pouch: This pouch contains
material components for those spells that require them.
Though the components are used up over time, you can
refill spent components during your daily preparations.
Musical Instrument: Handheld instruments include
bagpipes, a small set of chimes, small drums, fiddles and
viols, flutes and recorders, small harps, lutes, trumpets,
and similarly sized instruments. The GM might rule that
Core Rulebook
290
an especially large handheld instrument (like a tuba) has
greater Bulk. Heavy instruments such as large drums, a full
set of chimes, and keyboard instruments are less portable
and generally need to be stationary while played.
A virtuoso instrument gives a +1 item bonus to
Performance checks using that instrument.
Oil: You can use oil to fuel lanterns, but you can
also set a pint of oil aflame and throw it. You
must first spend an Interact action preparing
the oil, then throw it with another action as
a ranged attack. If you hit, it splatters on
the creature or in a single 5-foot square
you target. You must succeed at a DC 10 flat
check for the oil to ignite successfully when it hits.
If the oil ignites, the target takes 1d6 fire damage.
Piton: These small spikes can be used as anchors
to make climbing easier. To affix a piton, you must
hold it in one hand and use a hammer to drive it in
with your other hand. You can attach a rope to the
hammered piton so that you don’t fall all the way to the
ground on a critical failure while Climbing.
Religious Symbol: This piece of wood or silver is
emblazoned with an image representing a deity. Some
divine spellcasters, such as clerics, can use a religious
symbol of their deity as a divine focus to use certain
abilities and cast some spells. A religious symbol must be
held in one hand to use it.
Religious Text: This manuscript contains
scripture of a particular religion. Some
divine spellcasters, such as clerics, can use a
religious text as a divine focus to use certain
abilities and cast some spells. A religious
text must be held in one hand to use it.
Repair Kit: A repair kit allows you to
perform simple repairs while traveling.
It contains a portable anvil, tongs,
woodworking tools, a whetstone, and oils for
conditioning leather and wood. You can use a
repair kit to Repair items using the Crafting skill. A
superb repair kit gives you a +1 item bonus to the check.
Sack: A sack can hold up to 8 Bulk worth of items. A
sack containing 2 Bulk or less can be worn on the body,
usually tucked into a belt. You can carry a sack with one
hand, but must use two hands to transfer items in and out.
Saddlebags: Saddlebags come in a pair. Each can hold up
to 3 Bulk of items. The Bulk value given is for saddlebags
worn by a mount. If you are carrying or stowing saddlebags,
they count as 1 Bulk instead of light Bulk.
Satchel: A satchel can hold up to 2 Bulk worth of
items. If you are carrying or stowing a satchel rather
than wearing it over your shoulder, it counts as light Bulk
instead of negligible.
Scholarly Journal: Scholarly journals are uncommon.
Each scholarly journal is a folio on a very specific topic, such
as vampires or the history of a single town or neighborhood
of a city. If you spend 1 minute referencing an academic
journal before attempting a skill check to Recall Knowledge
about the subject, you gain a +1 item bonus to the check. A
compendium of journals costs five times as much as a single
journal and requires both hands to use; each compendium
contains several journals and grants its bonus on a broader
topic, such as all undead or a whole city. The GM
determines what scholarly journals are available in
any location.
Scroll Case: Scrolls, maps, and other rolled
documents are stored in scroll cases for
safe transport.
Sheath: A sheath or scabbard lets you
easily carry a weapon on your person.
Signal Whistle: When sounded, a signal whistle
can be heard clearly up to half a mile away across
open terrain.
Snare Kit: This kit contains tools and materials for
creating snares. A snare kit allows you to Craft snares
using the Crafting skill. A specialist snare kit gives you
a +1 item bonus to the check.
Spellbook: A spellbook holds the written knowledge
necessary to learn and prepare various spells, a necessity
for wizards (who typically get one for free) and a useful
luxury for other spellcasters looking to learn additional
spells. Each spellbook can hold up to 100 spells. The
Price listed is for a blank spellbook.
Spyglass: A typical spyglass lets you see eight
times farther than normal. A fine spyglass
adds a +1 item bonus to Perception checks
to notice details at a distance.
Survey Map: Maps are uncommon.
Most maps you can find are simple
and functional. A survey map details a
single location in excellent detail. One
of these maps gives you a +1 item bonus
to Survival checks and any skill checks to
Recall Knowledge, provided the checks are
related to the location detailed on the map.
Maps sometimes come in atlases, containing a
number of maps of the same quality, often on similar
topics. An atlas costs five times as much as a single map
and requires both hands to use. The GM determines what
maps are available in any location.
Tack: Tack includes all the gear required to outfit a
riding animal, including a saddle, bit and bridle, and
stirrups if necessary. Especially large or oddly shaped
animals might require specialty saddles. These can be
more expensive or hard to find, as determined by the
GM. The Bulk value given is for tack worn by a creature.
If carried, the Bulk increases to 2.
Ten-Foot Pole: When wielding this long pole, you can
use Seek to search a square up to 10 feet away. The pole
is not sturdy enough to use as a weapon.
Thieves’ Tools: You need thieves’ tools to Pick Locks or
Disable Devices (of some types) using the Thievery skill.
Infiltrator thieves’ tools add a +1 item bonus to checks
EQUIPMENT 6
291
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
to Pick Locks and Disable Devices. If your thieves’ tools
are broken, you can repair them by replacing the lock
picks with replacement picks appropriate to your tools;
this doesn’t require using the Repair action.
Tool: This entry is a catchall for basic hand tools
that don’t have a specific adventuring purpose. A hoe,
shovel, or sledgehammer is a long tool, and a hand drill,
ice hook, or trowel is a short tool. A tool can usually be
used as an improvised weapon, dealing 1d4 damage for a
short tool or 1d6 for a long tool. The GM determines the
damage type that’s appropriate or adjusts the damage
if needed.
Torch: A torch sheds bright light in a 20-foot
radius (and dim light to the next 20 feet). It can be
used as an improvised weapon that deals 1d4
bludgeoning damage plus 1 fire damage.
Vial: A simple glass vial holds up to 1
ounce of liquid.
Waterskin: When it’s full, a
waterskin has 1 Bulk and contains
roughly 1 day’s worth of water for
a Small or Medium creature.
Writing Set: Using a writing set, you
can draft correspondence and scribe scrolls. A
set includes stationery, including a variety of paper
and parchment, as well as ink, a quill or inkpen,
sealing wax, and a simple seal. If you’ve written a large
amount, you can refill your kit with extra ink and paper.
Alchemical Gear
The items listed on Table 6–11 are the most
widely available alchemical items from
Chapter 11, which a 1st-level character
could likely access. The descriptions
below are incomplete; each item’s full
entry appears in Chapter 11 on the
page listed in the table. Your GM
might allow you  to start with other
alchemical items from Chapter 11 on a
case‑by‑case basis.
TABLE 6–11: ALCHEMICAL GEAR
Alchemical Bombs Price Bulk Page
Lesser acid flask 3 gp L 544
Lesser alchemist’s fire 3 gp L 545
Lesser bottled lightning 3 gp L 545
Lesser frost vial 3 gp L 545
Lesser tanglefoot bag 3 gp L 545
Lesser thunderstone 3 gp L 545
Elixirs Price Bulk Page
Lesser antidote 3 gp L 546
Lesser antiplague 3 gp L 546
Lesser elixir of life 3 gp L 548
Alchemical Tools Price Bulk Page
Lesser smokestick 3 gp L 554
Sunrod 3 gp L 554
Tindertwig (10) 2 sp — 554
Alchemical Bombs
Alchemical bombs are consumable weapons that deal
damage or produce special effects, and they sometimes
deal splash damage. For more on alchemical bombs, see
page 544.
Lesser Acid Flask: This alchemical bomb deals 1
acid damage, 1d6 persistent acid damage, and 1 acid
splash damage.
Lesser Alchemist’s Fire: This alchemical
bomb deals 1d8 fire damage, 1 persistent
fire damage, and 1 fire splash damage.
Lesser Bottled Lightning: This
alchemical bomb deals 1d6 electricity
damage and 1 electricity splash damage,
and it makes the target flat-footed.
Lesser Frost Vial: This alchemical bomb
deals 1d6 cold damage and 1 cold splash
damage, and it gives the target a –5-foot status
penalty to its Speeds until the end of its next turn.
Lesser Tanglefoot Bag: This alchemical bomb
gives the target a –10-foot status penalty to its Speeds
for 1 minute, and the target is immobilized on a critical
hit unless it Escapes.
Lesser Thunderstone: This alchemical bomb deals 1d4
sonic damage and 1 sonic splash damage, and any
creature within 10 feet that fails a DC 17 Fortitude
save is deafened until the end of its turn.
Elixirs
Elixirs are alchemical items you drink to gain
various unusual effects. For more on elixirs,
see page 546.
Lesser Antidote: After drinking a lesser
antidote, you gain a +2 item bonus to
Fortitude saves against poison for 6 hours.
Lesser Antiplague: After drinking a lesser
antiplague, you gain a +2 item bonus to
Fortitude saves against disease for 24 hours,
including your saves against diseases’ progression.
Lesser Elixir of Life: Drinking a lesser elixir of life
restores 1d6 Hit Points and grants a +1 item bonus to
saving throws against diseases and poisons for 10 minutes.
Alchemical Tools
Alchemical tools are a type of alchemical item you use,
rather than drink or throw. For more on alchemical tools,
see page 564.
Smokestick: You create a 5-foot radius smokescreen
for 1 minute.
Sunrod: You can strike a sunrod on a hard surface as
an Interact action to cause it to shed bright light in a
20-foot radius (dim light in the next 20 feet) for 6 hours.
Tindertwig: You can use a tindertwig to ignite
Core Rulebook
292
something flammable with a single Interact action, faster
than with flint and steel.
Magical Gear
The items on Table 6–12 are the magic items from
Chapter 11 that a 1st-level character could most
frequently access. The descriptions below are
incomplete; the items’ full entries appear in Chapter 11
on the pages listed in the table. Your GM might allow
you to start with other magic items from Chapter 11
on a case‑by‑case basis.
TABLE 6–12: MAGICAL GEAR
Consumable Magic Items Price Bulk Page
Holy water 3 gp L 571
Unholy water 3 gp L 571
Potions Price Bulk Page
Minor healing potion 3 gp L 563
Scrolls Price Bulk Page
Scroll of a common 1st-level spell 4 gp L 565
Talismans Price Bulk Page
Potency crystal 4 gp — 568
Consumable Magic Items
You can typically purchase holy and unholy water in
a settlement. Particularly good settlements tend to ban
unholy water and evil settlements tend to ban holy water.
Holy Water: You can throw holy water like a bomb,
dealing 1d6 good damage to fiends, undead, and other
creatures weak to good damage.
Unholy Water: You can throw unholy water like a
bomb, dealing 1d6 good damage to celestials and other
creatures weak to evil damage.
Potions
Potions are magic items you drink to gain a variety of
benefits. For more on potions, see page 562.
Minor Healing Potion: After drinking a minor healing
potion, you regain 1d8 Hit Points.
Scrolls
Scrolls are magical scriptures that hold the necessary magic
to cast a particular spell without using your spell slots.
The Price listed in the table is for a scroll with a common
1st‑level spell. For more on scrolls, see page 564.
Talismans
A talisman is a special, single-use item you affix to your
armor, a weapon, or elsewhere, allowing you to activate
the talisman later for a special benefit. For more on
talismans, see page 565.
Potency Crystal: When you affix the crystal to a weapon
and activate it, this talisman empowers the weapon for
the rest of the turn, granting it a +1 item bonus to attack
rolls and a second weapon damage die.
Formulas
Formulas are instructions for making items with the
Craft activity. You can usually read a formula as long
as you can read the language it’s written in, though you
might lack the skill to Craft the item. Often, alchemists
and crafting guilds use obscure languages or create codes
to protect their formulas from rivals.
You can buy common formulas at the Price listed on
Table 6–13, or you can hire an NPC to let you copy
their formula for the same Price. A purchased formula
is typically a schematic on rolled-up parchment of light
Bulk. You can copy a formula into your formula book in
1 hour, either from a schematic or directly from someone
else’s formula book. If you have a formula, you can
Craft a copy of it using the Crafting skill. Formulas for
uncommon items and rare items are usually significantly
more valuable—if you can find them at all!
If you have an item, you can try to reverse‑engineer
its formula. This uses the Craft activity and takes the
same amount of time as creating the item from a formula
would. You must first disassemble the item. After the
base downtime, you attempt a Crafting check against the
same DC it would take to Craft the item. If you succeed,
you Craft the formula at its full Price, and you can keep
working to reduce the Price as normal. If you fail, you’re
left with raw materials and no formula. If you critically
fail, you also waste 10% of the raw materials you’d
normally be able to salvage.
The item’s disassembled parts are worth half its Price
in raw materials and can’t be reassembled unless you
successfully reverse-engineer the formula or acquire the
formula another way. Reassembling the item from the
formula works just like Crafting it from scratch; you use
the disassembled parts as the necessary raw materials.
TABLE 6–13: FORMULAS
Item Level Formula Price Item Level Formula Price
0* 5 sp 11 70 gp
1 1 gp 12 100 gp
2 2 gp 13 150 gp
3 3 gp 14 225 gp
4 5 gp 15 325 gp
5 8 gp 16 500 gp
6 13 gp 17 750 gp
7 18 gp 18 1,200 gp
8 25 gp 19 2,000 gp
9 35 gp 20 3,500 gp
10 50 gp
* Formulas for all 0-level common items from this chapter
can be purchased collectively in a basic crafter’s book.
Items with Multiple Types
If an item has multiple types of different levels, each
type has its own formula, and you need the formula for
the specific type of item you want to Craft. For example,
if you have a formula for a type I bag of holding but not
EQUIPMENT 6
293
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
for a type II bag of holding, you must acquire a separate
formula to Craft a type II bag of holding.
Services
The services listed on Table 6–14 describe expenditures
for common services and consumables.
TABLE 6–14: BASIC SERVICES AND CONSUMABLES
Item Price Bulk Hands
Beverages
Mug of ale 1 cp L 1
Keg of ale 2 sp 2 2
Pot of coffee or tea 2 cp L 1
Bottle of wine 1 sp L 1
Bottle of fine wine 1 gp L 1
Hireling (1 day)
Unskilled 1 sp
Skilled 5 sp
Lodging (1 day)
Floor space 3 cp
Bed (for 1) 1 sp
Private room (for 2) 8 sp
Extravagant suite (for 6) 10 gp
Meals
Poor meal 1 cp L 2
Square meal 3 cp L 2
Fine dining 1 gp L 2
Stabling (1 day) 2 cp
Toll at least 1 cp
Transportation (per 5 miles)
Caravan 3 cp
Carriage 2 sp
Ferry or riverboat 4 cp
Sailing ship 6 cp
Hirelings
Paid laborers can provide services for you. Unskilled
hirelings can perform simple manual labor and are
untrained at most skills. Skilled hirelings have expert
proficiency in a particular skill. Hirelings are level 0. If
a skill check is needed, an untrained hireling has a +0
modifier, while a skilled hireling has a +4 modifier in their
area of expertise and +0 for other skill checks. Hirelings’
rates double if they’re going adventuring with you.
Transportation
The cost to hire transportation includes standard travel
with no amenities. Most transit services provide basic
sleeping arrangements, and some provide meals at the
rates listed on Table 6–14. Arranging transportation into
dangerous lands can be more expensive or impossible.
Spellcasting
Spellcasting services, listed on Table 6–15, are uncommon.
Having a spell cast for you requires finding a spellcaster
who knows and is willing to cast it. It’s hard to find
someone who can cast higher-level spells, and uncommon
spells typically cost at least 100% more, if you can find
someone who knows them at all. Spells that take a long
time to cast (over 1 minute) usually cost 25% more. You
must pay any cost listed in the spell in addition to the
Price on the table.
TABLE 6–15: SPELLCASTING SERVICES
Spell Level Price* Spell Level Price*
1st 3 gp 6th 160 gp
2nd 7 gp 7th 360 gp
3rd 18 gp 8th 720 gp
4th 40 gp 9th 1,800 gp
5th 80 gp
* Plus any cost required to cast the specific spell.
Cost of Living
Table 6–16 shows how much it costs to get by. This covers
room and board, dues, taxes, and other fees.
TABLE 6–16: COST OF LIVING
Standard of Living Week Month Year
Subsistence* 4 sp 2 gp 24 gp
Comfortable 1 gp 4 gp 52 gp
Fine 30 gp 130 gp 1,600 gp
Extravagant 100 gp 430 gp 5,200 gp
* You can attempt to Subsist using Society or Survival (page
240) for free.
Animals
The Prices for animals are listed both for renting and for
purchasing them outright. You usually need to pay for
animal rentals up front, and if the vendor believes the
animal might be put in danger, they typically require a
deposit equal to the purchase Price. Most animals panic
in battle. When combat begins, they become frightened
4 and fleeing as long as they’re frightened. If you
successfully Command your Animal using Nature (page
249), you can keep it from fleeing, though this doesn’t
remove its frightened condition. If the animal is attacked
or damaged, it returns to frightened 4 and fleeing, with
the same exceptions.
Warhorses and warponies are combat trained. They
don’t become frightened or fleeing during encounters in
this way.
Statistics for the animals appear in the Pathfinder Bestiary.
TABLE 6–17: ANIMALS
Rental Price* Purchase
Animal (per day) Price
Dog
Guard dog 1 cp per day 2 sp
Riding dog 6 cp per day 4 gp
Core Rulebook
294
Horse
Riding horse 1 sp per day 8 gp
Warhorse 1 gp per day 30 gp (level 2)
Pack animal 2 cp per day 2 gp
Pony
Riding pony 8 cp per day 7 gp
Warpony 8 sp per day 24 gp (level 2)
* Might require a deposit equal to the purchase Price.
Barding
You can purchase special armor for animals, called
barding (shown on Table 6–18). All animals have a trained
proficiency rank in light barding, and combat-trained
animals are trained in heavy barding. Barding uses the
same rules as armor except for the following. The Price
and Bulk of barding depend on the animal’s size. Unlike
for a suit of armor, barding’s Strength entry is listed as a
modifier, not a score. Barding can’t be etched with magic
runes, though special magical barding might be available.
Items and Sizes
The Bulk rules in this chapter are for Small and Medium
creatures, as the items are made for creatures of those
sizes. Large creatures can carry more, and smaller
creatures can carry less, as noted on Table 6–19.
These rules for Bulk limits come up most often when a
group tries to load up a mount or animal companion. The
rules for items of different sizes tend to come into play
when the characters defeat a big creature that has gear,
since in most cases, the only creatures of other sizes are
creatures under the GM’s control. In most cases, Small or
Medium creatures can wield a Large weapon, though it’s
unwieldy, giving them the clumsy 1 condition, and the
larger size is canceled by the difficulty of swinging the
weapon, so it grants no special benefit. Large armor is
simply too large for Small and Medium creatures.
Bulk Conversions for Different Sizes
As shown in Table 6–19, Large or larger creatures are
less encumbered by bulky items than Small or Medium
creatures, while Tiny creatures become overburdened
more quickly. A Large creature treats 10 items of 1 Bulk
as 1 Bulk, a Huge creature treats 10 items of 2 Bulk
as 1 Bulk, and so on. A Tiny creature treats 10 items
of negligible Bulk as 1 Bulk. Negligible items work in
a similar way—a Huge creature treats items of 1 Bulk
TABLE 6–18: BARDING
Light Barding Price AC Bonus Dex Cap Check Penalty Speed Penalty Bulk Strength
Small or Medium 10 gp +1 +5 –1 –5 ft. 2 +3
Large 20 gp +1 +5 –1 –5 ft. 4 +3
Heavy Barding Price AC Bonus Dex Cap Check Penalty Speed Penalty Bulk Strength
Small or Medium (level 2) 25 gp +3 +3 –3 –10 ft. 4 +5
Large (level 3) 50 gp +3 +3 –3 –10 ft. 8 +5
as negligible, so it can carry any number of items of 1
Bulk. A Tiny creature doesn’t treat any items as having
negligible Bulk.
TABLE 6–19: BULK CONVERSIONS
Creature Bulk Treats Treats as
Size Limit as Light Negligible
Tiny Half — none
Small or Med. Standard L —
Large ×2 1 Bulk L
Huge ×4 2 Bulk 1 Bulk
Gargantuan ×8 4 Bulk 2 Bulk
Items of Different Sizes
Creatures of sizes other than Small or Medium need items
appropriate to their size. These items have different Bulk
and possibly a different Price. Table 6–20 provides the
Price and Bulk conversion for such items.
TABLE 6–20: DIFFERENTLY SIZED ITEMS
Creature Light Negligible
Size Price Bulk Becomes Becomes
Tiny Standard Half* — —
Small or Med. Standard Standard L —
Large ×2 ×2 1 Bulk L
Huge ×4 ×4 2 Bulk 1 Bulk
Gargantuan ×8 ×8 4 Bulk 2 Bulk
* An item that would have its Bulk reduced below 1 has
light Bulk.
For example, a morningstar sized for a Medium
creature has a Price of 1 gp and 1 Bulk, so one made for a
Huge creature has a Price of 4 gp and 4 Bulk. One made
for a Tiny creature still costs 1 gp (due to its intricacy)
and has 1/2 Bulk, which rounds down to light Bulk.
Because the way that a creature treats Bulk and the
Bulk of gear sized for it scale the same way, Tiny or
Large (or larger) creatures can usually wear and carry
about the same amount of appropriately sized gear as a
Medium creature.
Higher-level magic items that cost significantly more
than 8 times the cost of a mundane item can use their
listed Price regardless of size. Precious materials, however,
have a Price based on the Bulk of the item, so multiply
the Bulk value as described on Table 6–20, then use the
formula in the precious material’s entry to determine the
item’s Price. See page 578 for more information.
EQUIPMENT 6
295
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Core Rulebook
296
With special gestures and utterances, a spellcaster can call forth mystic energies,
warp the mind, protect themself against danger, or even create something from
nothing. Each class has its own method of learning, preparing, and casting spells,
and every individual spell produces a specific effect, so learning new spells gives a
spellcaster an increasing array of options to accomplish their goals.
Tradition and School
The fundamental building blocks of magic are the magical traditions and the schools
of magic. The four traditions are arcane, divine, occult, and primal. A spell’s magical
tradition can vary, because many spells can be cast using different traditions. A spell’s
school, on the other hand, is intrinsic to the spell and establishes what the spell is
capable of. Abjuration spells, for example, can raise protective wards, enchantment
spells can change thoughts, and evocation spells can create blasts of fire.
Magical Schools
All spells, all magic items, and most other magical effects fall into one of the eight
schools of magic. These schools broadly define what the magic is capable of. Every
spell has the trait corresponding to its school. Some spellcasters, like specialist
wizards, have particular acumen with a certain school of magic.
Abjuration
Abjurations protect and ward. They create barriers that keep out attacks,
effects, or even certain types of creatures. They also create effects that harm
trespassers or banish interlopers.
Conjuration
Conjuration spells transport creatures via teleportation, create an object, or
bring a creature or object from somewhere else (typically from another
plane) to follow your commands.
Conjuration spells often have the teleportation trait, and the
creatures summoned by conjuration spells have the summoned trait.
Divination
Divinations allow you to learn the secrets of the present, past,
and future. They bestow good fortune, grant you the ability to
perceive remote locations, and reveal secret knowledge.
Divinations often have the detection trait if they find something, the prediction
trait if they grant you insight about what might happen in the future, the revelation
trait if they show things as they truly are, or the scrying trait if they let you perceive
another location.
Enchantment
Enchantments affect the minds and emotions of other creatures—sometimes to
influence and control them, and other times to bolster them to greater heights
of courage. Enchantment spells almost always have the mental trait, and many have
the emotion trait or the fear trait.
Chapter 7: Spells
Whether it comes in the form of mystic artifacts, mysterious creatures, or wizards weaving
strange spells, magic brings fantasy and wonder to Pathfinder. This chapter explains how spells
work and how spellcasters prepare and cast their spells.
SPELLBOOKS
Carefully maintained and
jealously guarded, there are
few things more valuable to a
wizard than a spellbook. These
repositories of magical lore are
often trapped and warded to
ensure that no one meddles
with the secrets inside.
Although spellbooks play
a central role in a wizard’s
daily routine, other prepared
spellcasting classes have been
known to use spellbooks to
record uncommon or even rare
spells. Such a resource allows
a caster to treat the spell like
any other common spell, so long
as they can reference the book
during their daily preparations.
7
297
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Evocation
Evocations capture magical energy and then shape it to
harm your foes or protect your allies. Evocation spells
often have a trait that comes from the type of damage
they deal, such as acid, cold, fire, force, or sonic.
Illusion
Illusions create the semblance of something real, fooling
the eyes, ears, and other senses. They almost always have
the mental trait, and depending on how the illusion is
perceived, they might also have the auditory or visual trait.
Necromancy
Necromancy spells harness the power of life and death.
They can sap life essence or sustain creatures with
life-saving  healing. Necromancy spells often have the
curse, death, healing, negative, or positive traits.
Transmutation
Transmutation spells make alterations to or transform
the physical form of a creature or object. The morph and
polymorph traits appear primarily in transmutation spells.
Spell Slots
Characters of spellcasting classes can cast a certain
number of spells each day; the spells you can cast in a
day are referred to as spell slots. At 1st level, a character
has only a small number of 1st-level spell slots per day,
but as you advance in level, you gain more spell slots and
new slots for higher-level spells. A spell’s level indicates its
overall power, from 1 to 10.
Prepared Spells
If you’re a prepared spellcaster—such as a cleric, druid, or
wizard—you must spend time each day preparing spells for
that day. At the start of your daily preparations, you select
a number of spells of different spell levels determined by
your character level and class. Your spells remain prepared
until you cast them or until you prepare spells again.
Each prepared spell is expended after a single casting,
so if you want to cast a particular spell more than once in
a day, you need to prepare that spell multiple times. The
exceptions to this rule are spells with the cantrip trait;
once you prepare a cantrip, you can cast it as many times
as you want until the next time you prepare spells. See
page 300 for more information on cantrips.
You might gain an ability that allows you to swap
prepared spells or perform other aspects of preparing
spells at different times throughout the day, but only your
daily preparation counts for the purpose of effects that
last until the next time you prepare spells.
Spontaneous Spells
If you’re a spontaneous spellcaster—such as a bard or
a sorcerer—you choose which spell you’re using a spell
SPELL ATTACK ROLL AND SPELL DC
Many spells allow creatures to defend themselves using
either their AC or a saving throw. Two statistics govern
how potent your spells are against these defenses: your
spell attack roll and your spell DC. When recording these
on your character sheet, add together only the numbers
that always apply—usually just your ability modifier and
proficiency bonus.
Spell attack roll = your spellcasting ability modifier +
proficiency bonus + other bonuses + penalties
Spell DC = 10 + your spellcasting ability modifier +
proficiency bonus + other bonuses + penalties
A spell attack roll is like other attack rolls, so any bonuses
or penalties that apply to all your attack rolls should be
included in your calculation. For instance, the +1 status
bonus from the bless spell would benefit your spell ray just
like it could an arrow. However, note that the spell attack roll
doesn’t gain any bonuses or penalties that apply specifically
to weapon attacks or unarmed attacks. The multiple attack
penalty applies to spell attacks, so it’s usually a bad idea to
cast a spell that has a spell attack roll if you’ve already made
an attack that turn.
As with other checks and DCs, bonuses can increase the
result of your spell attack roll or your spell DC, and penalties
can decrease the result of your spell attack roll or your spell
DC. See pages 444–445 in Chapter 9: Playing the Game for
more information about modifiers, bonuses, and penalties.
DISBELIEVING ILLUSIONS
Sometimes illusions allow an affected creature a chance
to disbelieve the spell, which lets the creature effectively
ignore the spell if it succeeds at doing so. This usually
happens when a creature Seeks or otherwise spends
actions to engage with the illusion, comparing the result
of its Perception check (or another check or saving throw,
at the GM’s discretion) to the caster’s spell DC. Mental
illusions typically provide rules in the spell’s description
for disbelieving the effect (often allowing the affected
creature to attempt a Will save).
If the illusion is visual, and a creature interacts with
the illusion in a way that would prove it is not what
it seems, the creature might know that an illusion is
present, but it still can’t ignore the illusion without
successfully disbelieving it. For instance, if a character
is pushed through the illusion of a door, they will know
that the door is an illusion, but they still can’t see
through it. Disbelieving an illusion makes it and those
things it blocks seem hazy and indistinct, so even in the
case where a visual illusion is disbelieved, it may, at the
GM’s discretion, block vision enough to make those on
the other side concealed..
Core Rulebook
298
Spellcasters cast spells from one of four different spell
lists, each representing a different  magical tradition:
arcane, divine, occult, and primal.
Your class determines which tradition of magic your
spells use. In some cases, such as when a cleric gains
spells from their deity or when a sorcerer gets spells
from their bloodline, you might be able to cast spells
Arcane
Arcane spellcasters use logic
and rationality to categorize
the magic inherent in the
world around them. Because
of its far-reaching approach,
the arcane tradition has
the broadest spell list,
though it’s generally poor
at affecting the spirit or the
soul. Wizards are the most
iconic arcane spellcasters,
poring over tomes and
grimoires, though arcane
sorcerers study the secrets
of their blood to unlock the
power within themselves.
Occult
The practitioners of
occult traditions seek
to understand the
unexplainable, categorize
the bizarre, and otherwise
access the ephemeral in
a systematic way. Bards
are the most iconic occult
spellcasters, collecting
strange esoterica and
using their performances
to influence the mind
or elevate the soul, and
occult sorcerers strive to
understand the mysterious
power in their blood.
Divine
The power of the divine is
steeped in faith, the unseen,
and belief in a power source
from beyond the Material
Plane. Clerics are the most
iconic divine spellcasters,
beseeching the gods to
grant them their magic.
Divine sorcerers can use
the blood of their celestial
or fiendish ancestors
as a divine conduit, and
champions call upon
their gods to grant them
martial prowess through
divine guidance.
Primal
An instinctual connection
to and faith in the world,
the cycle of day and night,
the turning of the seasons,
and the natural selection
of predator and prey drive
the primal tradition. Druids
are the most iconic primal
spellcasters, calling upon
the magic of nature through
deep faith and a connection
to the plants and animals
around them, and primal
sorcerers call upon their fey
or beast blood to harness
the same natural energies.
from a different spell list. In these cases, the spell uses
your magic tradition, not the list the spell normally
comes from. When you cast a spell, add your tradition’s
trait to the spell.
Some types of magic, such as that of most magic
items, don’t belong to any single tradition. These have
the magical trait instead of a tradition trait.
MAGICAL TRADITIONS
slot for at the moment you decide to cast it. This provides
you with more freedom in your spellcasting, but you
have fewer spells in your spell repertoire, as determined
by your character level and class. When you make your
daily preparations, all your spell slots are refreshed, but
you don’t get to change the spells in your repertoire.
Heightened Spells
Both prepared and spontaneous spellcasters can cast a
spell at a higher spell level than that listed for the spell.
This is called heightening the spell. A prepared spellcaster
can heighten a spell by preparing it in a higher-level slot
than its normal spell level, while a spontaneous spellcaster
can heighten a spell by casting it using a higher-level
spell slot, so long as they know the spell at that level
(see Heightened Spontaneous Spells below). When you
heighten your spell, the spell’s level increases to match
the higher level of the spell slot you’ve prepared it in or
used to cast it. This is useful for any spell, because some
effects, such as counteracting, depend on the spell’s level.
In addition, many spells have additional specific
benefits when they are heightened, such as increased
damage. These extra benefits are described at the end
of the spell’s stat block. Some heightened entries specify
one or more levels at which the spell must be prepared
or cast to gain these extra advantages. Each of these
heightened entries states specifically which aspects of
the spell change at the given level. Read the heightened
entry only for the spell level you’re using or preparing;
if its benefits are meant to include any of the effects of
a lower-level heightened entry, those benefits will be
included in the entry.
Other heightened entries give a number after a plus
sign, indicating that heightening grants extra advantages
over multiple levels. The listed effect applies for every
increment of levels by which the spell is heightened above
its lowest spell level, and the benefit is cumulative. For
example, fireball says “Heightened (+1) The damage
increases by 2d6.” Because fireball deals 6d6 fire damage
at 3rd level, a 4th-level fireball would deal 8d6 fire
damage, a 5th-level spell would deal 10d6 fire damage,
and so on.
Heightened Spontaneous Spells
If you’re a spontaneous spellcaster, you must know a spell
at the specific level that you want to cast it in order to
heighten it. You can add a spell to your spell repertoire
at more than a single level so that you have more options
when casting it. For example, if you added fireball to your
repertoire as a 3rd-level spell and again as a 5th-level
spell, you could cast it as a 3rd-level or a 5th-level spell;
however, you couldn’t cast it as a 4th-level spell.
Many spontaneous spellcasting classes provide abilities
like the signature spells class feature, which allows you
to cast a limited number of spells as heightened versions
even if you know the spell at only a single level.
299
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Cantrips
A cantrip is a special type of spell that’s weaker than other
spells but can be used with greater freedom and flexibility.
The title of a cantrip’s stat block says “Cantrip” instead
of “Spell.” Casting a cantrip doesn’t use up your spell
slots; you can cast a cantrip at will, any number of times
per day. If you’re a prepared caster, you have a number of
cantrip spell slots that you use to prepare your cantrips.
You can’t prepare a cantrip in any other slot.
A cantrip is always automatically heightened to half
your level, rounded up. For a typical spellcaster, this means
its level is equal to the highest level of spell slot you have.
Focus Spells
Focus spells are a special type of spell attained directly from
a branch of study, from a deity, or from another specific
source. You can learn focus spells only through special class
features or feats, rather than choosing them from a spell list.
Furthermore, you cast focus spells using a special pool of
Focus Points—you can’t prepare a focus spell in a spell slot
or use your spell slots to cast focus spells; similarly, you can’t
spend your Focus Points to cast spells that aren’t focus spells.
Even some classes that don’t normally grant spellcasting,
such as the champion and monk, can grant focus spells.
Focus spells are automatically heightened to half your
level rounded up, just like cantrips are. You can’t cast a
focus spell if its minimum level is greater than half your
level rounded up, even if you somehow gain access to it.
Casting any of your focus spells costs you 1 Focus Point.
You automatically gain a focus pool of 1 Focus Point the
first time you gain an ability that gives you a focus spell.
You replenish all the Focus Points in your pool during
your daily preparations. You can also use the Refocus
activity to pray, study, meditate, or otherwise reattune
yourself to the source of your focus magic and regain a
Focus Point.
Some abilities allow you to increase the Focus Points
in your pool beyond 1. Typically, these are feats that give
you a new focus spell and increase the number of points
in your pool by 1. Your focus pool can’t have a capacity
beyond 3 Focus Points, even if feats that increase your pool
would cause it to exceed this number.
REFOCUS
CONCENTRATE EXPLORATION
Requirements You have a focus pool, and you have spent at
least 1 Focus Point since you last regained any Focus Points.
You spend 10 minutes performing deeds to restore your
magical connection. This restores 1 Focus Point to your focus
pool. The deeds you need to perform are specified in the
class or ability that gives you your focus spells. These deeds
can usually overlap with other tasks that relate to the source
of your focus spells. For instance, a cleric with focus spells
from a good deity can usually Refocus while tending the
wounds of their allies, and a wizard of the illusionist school
might be able to Refocus while attempting to Identify Magic
of the illusion school.
Spells that affect certain physical or metaphysical forces
tend to be grouped into particular magical traditions.
Scholars of magic widely agree that all of existence is
composed of some combination of four essences, though
they disagree on the names and particular qualities of
each essence.
Matter
Also called body, material
essence, or physical
essence, matter is the
fundamental building
block that makes up all
physical things in the
universe. The arcane
and primal traditions
are especially attuned
toward manipulating and
shaping matter. Spells
that are used to create
or alter matter most
often come from the
conjuration, evocation, or
transmutation schools.
Mind
Also called thought or
astral essence, the mind
essence allows thinking
creatures to have rational
thoughts, ideas, plans,
logic, and memories. Mind
touches even nonsapient
creatures like animals,
though in a more limited
capacity. Arcane and
occult casters usually
excel at mind spells. Spells
that use mind essence
are usually found in the
divination, enchantment,
and illusion schools.
Spirit
Also called soul, ethereal
essence, or spiritual
essence, spirit is an
otherworldly building block
that makes up a being’s
immaterial and immortal
self. The spirit travels
through the Ethereal Plane
and into the Great Beyond
after the death of the
physical body. The spirit
is most easily affected by
divine and occult spells.
Spirit spells are usually
of the divination or
necromancy schools.
Life
Also called heart, faith,
instinct, or vital essence,
life represents the
animating universal force
within all things. Whereas
matter provides the base
materials for a body, life
keeps it alive and well. This
essence is responsible for
unconscious responses and
belief, such as ancestral
instincts and divine
guidance. The divine and
primal traditions hold
power over life. Life spells
are usually necromancy.
The following entries discuss each essence and the
traditions and spell schools relevant to it; for instance,
evocation spells tend to manipulate matter. The abjuration
school is an unusual case, as abjuration spells draw upon
different essences depending on who they are warding
and what they are protecting against.
THE FOUR ESSENCES
Core Rulebook
300
Some spells and effects have traits such as “mental” or
“good.” These tell you more about the spell and how it works,
and other rules might reference them. A creature might, for
example, have a –2 circumstance penalty to saving throws
against mental effects. Below is a glossary of a few traits
you might see with important rules.
Auditory
Auditory spells rely on sound. A spell with the auditory trait
has its effect only if the target can hear it. This is different
from a sonic effect, which still affects targets who can’t hear
it (such as deaf targets) as long as the effect makes sound.
Darkness and Light
Effects with the darkness and light traits interact in specific
ways. Non-magical light always shines in non-magical
darkness and always fails to shine in magical darkness.
Magical light always shines in non-magical darkness but
shines in magical darkness only if the light spell has a higher
level than that of the darkness effect. Spells with the darkness
trait or the light trait can always counteract one another, but
bringing light and darkness into contact doesn’t automatically
do so. You must usually cast a light spell on a darkness effect
directly to counteract it (and vice versa), but some spells
automatically attempt to counteract opposing effects.
Incapacitation
An ability with this trait can take a character completely out
of the fight or even kill them, and it’s harder to use on a more
powerful character. If a spell has the incapacitation trait, any
creature of more than twice the spell’s level treats the result
of their check to prevent being incapacitated as one degree of
success better or the result of any check the spellcaster made
to incapacitate them as one degree of success worse. If any
other effect has the incapacitation trait, a creature of higher
level than the item, creature, or hazard generating the effect
gains the same benefits.
Minion
Minions are creatures that directly serve another creature.
A creature with this trait can use only 2 actions per turn
and can’t use reactions. Your minion acts on your turn in
combat, once per turn, when you spend an action to issue
it commands. For an animal companion, you Command
an Animal; for a minion that’s a spell or magic item effect
like a summoned minion you Sustain a Spell or Sustain
an Activation; and if not otherwise specified, you issue a
verbal command, which is a single action with the auditory
and concentrate traits. If given no commands, by default
minions use no actions except to defend themselves or to
escape obvious harm. If left unattended for long enough,
typically 1 minute, mindless minions usually don’t act,
animals often indulge their creature comforts, and sapient
minions act how they please.
Morph
Spells that slightly alter a creature’s form have the morph
trait. Any Strikes specifically granted by a morph effect are
magical. You can be affected by multiple morph spells at once,
but if you morph the same body part more than once, the
second morph effect attempts to counteract the first (in the
same manner as two polymorph effects, described below).
Your morph effects might also end if you are polymorphed
and the polymorph effect invalidates or overrides your morph
effect. For instance, a morph that gave you wings would be
dismissed if you polymorphed into a form that had wings of
its own (though if your new form lacked wings, you’d keep
the wings from your morph). The GM determines which
morph effects can be used together and which can’t.
Polymorph
These effects transform the target into a new form. A target
can’t be under the effect of more than one polymorph effect
at a time. If it comes under the effect of a second polymorph
effect, the second polymorph effect attempts to counteract
the first. If it succeeds, it takes effect, and if it fails, the
spell has no effect on that target. Any Strikes specifically
granted by a polymorph effect are magical. Unless otherwise
stated, polymorph spells don’t allow the target to take on the
appearance of a specific individual creature, but rather just a
generic creature of a general type or ancestry.
If you take on a battle form with a polymorph spell, the
special statistics can be adjusted only by circumstance bonuses,
status bonuses, and penalties. Unless otherwise noted, the
battle form prevents you from casting spells, speaking, and
using most manipulate actions that require hands. (If there’s
doubt about whether you can use an action, the GM decides.)
Your gear is absorbed into you; the constant abilities of your
gear still function, but you can’t activate any items.
Summoned
A creature called by a conjuration spell or effect gains the
summoned trait. A summoned creature can’t summon other
creatures, create things of value, or cast spells that require a
cost. It has the minion trait. If it tries to cast a spell of equal
or higher level than the spell that summoned it, the spell fails
and the summon spell ends. Otherwise, it uses the standard
abilities for a creature of its kind. It generally attacks your
enemies to the best of its abilities. If you can communicate
with it, you can attempt to command it, but the GM
determines the degree to which it follows your commands.
Immediately when you finish Casting the Spell, the
summoned creature uses its 2 actions for that turn.
Summoned creatures can be banished by various spells
and effects. They are automatically banished if reduced to 0
Hit Points or if the spell that called them ends.
Visual
A visual spell can affect only creatures that can see it.
OTHER SPELL TRAITS
301
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Spellcasters with Focus Spells
If you are a spellcaster, your focus spells are the same
tradition of spell as the class that gave you the focus
spell. A bard’s are occult, a cleric’s are divine, a druid’s
are primal, a wizard’s are arcane, and a sorcerer’s are
determined by their bloodline.
Non-Spellcasters with Focus Spells
If you get focus spells from a class or other source that
doesn’t grant spellcasting ability (for example, if you’re
a monk with the Ki Strike feat), the ability that gives you
focus spells also provides your proficiency rank for spell
attack rolls and spell DCs, as well as the magical tradition of
your focus spells. You gain the ability to Cast a Spell and use
any spellcasting actions necessary to cast your focus spells
(see below). However, you don’t qualify for feats and other
rules that require you to be a spellcaster.
Innate Spells
Certain spells are natural to your character, typically
coming from your ancestry or a magic item rather than
your class. You can cast your innate spells even if you
aren’t a member of a spellcasting class. The ability that
gives you an innate spell tells you how often you can cast
it—usually once per day—and its magical tradition. Innate
spells are refreshed during your daily preparations. Innate
cantrips are cast at will and automatically heightened as
normal for cantrips (see Cantrips on page  300) unless
otherwise specified.
You’re always trained in spell attack rolls and spell DCs
for your innate spells, even if you aren’t otherwise trained
in spell attack rolls or spell DCs. If your proficiency in
spell attack rolls or spell DCs is expert or better, apply
that proficiency to your innate spells, too. You use your
Charisma modifier as your spellcasting ability modifier
for innate spells unless otherwise specified.
If you have an innate spell, you can cast it, even if
it’s not of a spell level you can normally cast. This is
especially common for monsters, which might be able to
cast innate spells far beyond what a character of the
same level could use.
You can’t use your spell slots to cast your innate
spells, but you might have an innate spell and
also be able to prepare or cast the same spell
through your class. You also can’t heighten
innate spells, but some abilities that
grant innate spells might give you the
spell at a higher level than its base level or
change the level at which you cast the spell.
Casting Spells
The casting of a spell can range from a simple word of
magical might that creates a fleeting effect to a complex
process taking minutes or hours to cast and producing
a long-term impact. Casting a Spell is a special activity
that takes a number of actions defined by the spell. When
you Cast a Spell, your spellcasting creates obvious visual
manifestations of the gathering magic, although feats such
as Conceal Spell (page 210) and Melodious Spell (page 101)
can help hide such manifestations or otherwise prevent
observers from noticing that you are casting.
CAST A SPELL
You cast a spell you have prepared or in your repertoire. Casting
a Spell is a special activity that takes a variable number of actions
depending on the spell, as listed in each spell’s stat block. As soon
as the spellcasting actions are complete, the spell effect occurs.
Some spells are cast as a reaction or free action. In those
cases, you Cast the Spell as a reaction or free action (as
appropriate) instead of as an activity. Such cases will be noted
in the spell’s stat block—for example, “[reaction] verbal.”
Long Casting Times Some spells take minutes or hours to
cast. The Cast a Spell activity for these spells includes a mix
of the listed spell components, but it’s not necessary to break
down which one you’re providing at a given time. You can’t use
other actions or reactions while casting such a spell, though at
the GM’s discretion, you might be able to speak a few sentences.
As with other activities that take a long time, these spells have
the exploration trait, and you can’t cast them in an encounter.
If combat breaks out while you’re casting one, your spell is
disrupted (see Disrupted and Lost Spells on page 303).
FOCUS POINTS FROM MULTIPLE SOURCES
It’s possible, especially through archetypes, to gain focus
spells and Focus Points from more than one source. If this
happens, you have just one focus pool, adding all the Focus
Points together to determine the total size of your pool.
(Remember that the maximum number of Focus Points a
pool can have is 3.) If you have multiple abilities that give
you a focus pool, each one adds 1 Focus Point to your pool.
For instance, if you were a cleric with the Domain Initiate
feat, you would have a pool with 1 Focus Point. Let’s say
you then took the champion multiclass archetype and the
Healing Touch feat. Normally, this feat would give you a
focus pool. Since you already have one, it instead increases
your existing pool’s capacity by 1.
Focus Points are not differentiated by source; you
can spend any of your Focus Points on any of your
focus spells. Likewise, when you Refocus, you get
back a point as long as you follow the guidelines
of any abilities that granted you focus
spells. Having Focus Points from multiple
sources doesn’t change the tradition of
your spells; if you had both cleric domain
spells and druid order spells, your domain spells
would remain divine and the order spells primal. This
could mean that you need to keep track of a different
proficiency and ability modifier with the spell DC and spell
attack roll of different focus spells.
Core Rulebook
302
Spell Components Each spell lists the spell components
required to cast it after the action icons or text, such as “[three-actions]
material, somatic, verbal." The spell components, described in
detail below, add traits and requirements to the Cast a Spell
activity. If you can’t provide the components, you fail to Cast
the Spell.
• Material (manipulate)
• Somatic (manipulate)
• Verbal (concentrate)
• Focus (manipulate)
Disrupted and Lost Spells Some abilities and spells can
disrupt a spell, causing it to have no effect and be lost. When
you lose a spell, you’ve already expended the spell slot, spent
the spell’s costs and actions, and used the Cast a Spell activity.
If a spell is disrupted during a Sustain a Spell action, the spell
immediately ends. The full rules for disrupting actions appear
on page 462.
Spell Components
A spell description lists the components required to Cast
the Spell. For most spells, the number of components is
equal to the number of actions you must spend to Cast
the Spell. Each component adds certain traits to the
Cast a Spell activity, and some components have special
requirements. The components that appear in this book
are listed below.
Material
A material component is a bit of physical matter
consumed in the casting of the spell. The spell gains the
manipulate trait and requires you to have a free hand
to retrieve and manipulate a material component. That
component is expended in the casting (even if the spell
is disrupted).
Except in extreme circumstances, you can assume
all common components are included in a material
component pouch (page 290).
Somatic
A somatic component is a specific hand movement or
gesture that generates a magical nexus. The spell gains the
manipulate trait and requires you to make gestures. You
can use this component while holding something in
your hand, but not if you are restrained or otherwise
unable to gesture freely.
Spells that require you to touch the target require
a somatic component. You can do so while holding
something as long as part of your hand is able to touch
the target (even if it’s through a glove or gauntlet).
Verbal
A verbal component is a vocalization of words of power.
You must speak them in a strong voice, so it’s hard to
conceal that you’re Casting a Spell. The spell gains
the concentrate trait. You must be able to speak to
provide this component.
COMPONENT SUBSTITUTIONS
Some classes can substitute one component for another
or alter how a component works.
If you’re a bard Casting a Spell from the occult tradition
while holding a musical instrument, you can play that
instrument to replace any material, somatic, or verbal
components the spell requires by using the instrument as
a focus component instead. Cast a Spell gains the auditory
trait if you make this substitution. Unlike the normal rules
for a focus component, you can’t retrieve or stow the
instrument when making this substitution.
If you’re a cleric Casting a Spell from the divine tradition
while holding a divine focus (such as a religious symbol or
text), you can replace any material component the spell
requires by using the divine focus as a focus component
instead. Unlike the normal rules for a focus component,
you can’t retrieve or stow the focus when making
this substitution.
If you’re a druid Casting a Spell from the primal tradition
while holding a primal focus (such as holly and mistletoe),
you can replace any material component the spell requires
by using the primal focus as a focus component instead.
Unlike the normal rules for a focus component, you can’t
retrieve or stow the focus when making this substitution.
If you’re a sorcerer Casting a Spell from the magical
tradition that matches your bloodline, you can draw
on the magic within your blood to replace any material
component with a somatic component.
Focus
A focus is an object that funnels the magical energy of
the spell. The spell gains the manipulate trait and requires
you to either have a free hand to retrieve the focus listed
in the spell or already be holding the focus in your hand.
As part of Casting the Spell, you retrieve the focus (if
necessary), manipulate it, and can stow it again if you
so choose.
Foci tend to be expensive, and you need to acquire them
in advance to Cast the Spell.
303
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Ranges, Areas, and Targets
Spells with a range can affect targets, create areas, or
make things appear only within that range. Most spell
ranges are measured in feet, though some can stretch over
miles, reach anywhere on the planet, or go even farther!
Touch Range
A spell with a range of touch requires you to physically
touch the target. You use your unarmed reach to
determine whether you can touch the creature. You can
usually touch the target automatically, though the spell
might specify that the target can attempt a saving throw
or that you must attempt a spell attack roll. If an ability
increases the range of a touch spell, start at 0 feet and
increase from there.
Areas
Sometimes a spell has an area, which can be a burst,
cone, emanation, or line. The method of measuring these
areas can be found on page 456. If the spell originates
from your position, the spell has only an area; if you can
cause the spell’s area to appear farther away from you,
the spell has both a range and an area.
Targets
Some spells allow you to directly target a creature, an
object, or something that fits a more specific category. The
target must be within the spell’s range, and you must be
able to see it (or otherwise perceive it with a precise sense)
to target it normally. At the GM’s discretion, you can
attempt to target a creature you can’t see, as described
in Detecting Creatures on pages 465–467. If you fail to
target a particular creature, this doesn’t change how the
spell affects any other targets the spell might have.
If you choose a target that isn’t valid, such as if you
thought a vampire was a living creature and targeted it
with a spell that can target only living creatures, your
spell fails to target that creature. If a creature starts out
as a valid target but ceases to be one during a spell’s
duration, the spell typically ends, but the GM might
decide otherwise in certain situations.
Spells that affect multiple creatures in an area can have
both an Area entry and a Targets entry. A spell that has
an area but no targets listed usually affects all creatures
in the area indiscriminately.
Some spells restrict you to willing targets. A player
can declare their character a willing or unwilling target
at any time, regardless of turn order or their character’s
condition (such as when a character is paralyzed,
unconscious, or even dead).
Line of Effect
You usually need an unobstructed path to the target of a
spell, the origin point of an area, or the place where you
create something with a spell. More information on line
of effect can be found on page 457.
Durations
The duration of a spell is how long the spell effect lasts.
Spells that last for more than an instant have a Duration
entry. A spell might last until the start or end of a turn, for
some number of rounds, for minutes, or even longer. If a
spell’s duration is given in rounds, the number of rounds
remaining decreases by 1 at the start of each of the
spellcaster’s turns, ending when the duration reaches 0.
Some spells have effects that remain even after the
spell’s magic is gone. Any ongoing effect that isn’t part
of the spell’s duration entry isn’t considered magical.
For instance, a spell that creates a loud sound and has
no duration might deafen someone for a time, even
permanently. This deafness couldn’t be counteracted
because it is not itself magical (though it might be cured
by other magic, such as restore senses).
If a spell’s caster dies or is incapacitated during the spell’s
duration, the spell remains in effect till its duration ends.
You might need to keep track of the caster’s initiative after
they stopped being able to act to monitor spell durations.
Sustaining Spells
If the spell’s duration is “sustained,” it lasts until the end
of your next turn unless you use a Sustain a Spell action
on that turn to extend the duration of that spell.
SUSTAIN A SPELL [one-action]
CONCENTRATE
Requirements You have at least one spell active with a
sustained duration, and you are not fatigued.
Choose one spell with a sustained duration you have in effect.
The duration of that spell continues until the end of your next
turn. Some spells might have slightly different or expanded
effects if you sustain them. Sustaining a Spell for more than 10
minutes (100 rounds) ends the spell and makes you fatigued
unless the spell lists a different maximum duration (such as
“sustained up to 1 minute” or “sustained up to 1 hour”).
If your Sustain a Spell action is disrupted, the spell
immediately ends.
METAMAGIC
Many spellcasters can gain access to metamagic
actions, typically by selecting metamagic feats. Actions
with the metamagic trait tweak the properties of your
spells, changing their range, damage, or any number
of other properties. You must use a metamagic action
directly before the spell you want to alter. If you use any
action (including free actions, reactions, and additional
metamagic actions) other than Cast a Spell directly after,
you waste the benefits of the metamagic action. Any
additional effects added by a metamagic action are part
of the spell’s effect, not of the metamagic action itself.
Core Rulebook
304
Long Durations
If a spell’s duration says it lasts until your next daily
preparations, on the next day you can refrain from
preparing a new spell in that spell’s slot. (If you are
a spontaneous caster, you can instead expend a spell
slot during your preparations.) Doing so extends the
spell’s duration until your next daily preparations. This
effectively Sustains the Spell over a long period of time.
If you prepare a new spell in the slot (or don’t expend
a spell slot), the spell ends. You can’t do this if the spell
didn’t come from one of your spell slots. If you are dead
or otherwise incapacitated at the 24-hour mark after the
time you Cast the Spell or the last time you extended
its duration, the spell ends. Spells with an unlimited
duration last until counteracted or Dismissed. You
don’t need to keep a spell slot open for these spells.
Dismissing
Some spells can be dismissed, ending the duration early.
This requires the caster or target to use the Dismiss action.
DISMISS [one-action]
CONCENTRATE
You end one spell effect or magic item effect. This must be an
effect you are allowed to dismiss, as defined by the spell or
item. Dismissal might end the effect entirely or might end it just
for a certain target or targets, depending on the spell or item.
Saving Throws
Spells that require a target to attempt a save to resist some
or all of the spell’s effects have a Saving Throw entry. This
entry presents the type of save for quick reference, and
specific details appear in the spell description. Whenever
a spell allows a saving throw, it uses the caster’s spell DC.
Basic Saving Throws
If a spell’s Saving Throw entry specifies a “basic” saving
throw, the spell’s potential effects all relate to the damage
listed in the spell’s description. The target takes no damage
on a critical success, half damage on a success, full damage on
a failure, or double damage on a critical failure. The rules
for basic saving throws are found on page 449.
Spell Attacks
Some spells require you to succeed at a spell attack roll
to affect the target. This is usually because they require
you to precisely aim a ray or otherwise make an accurate
attack. A spell attack roll is compared to the target’s AC.
Spell attack rolls benefit from any bonuses or penalties to
attack rolls, including your multiple attack penalty, but not
any special benefits or penalties that apply only to weapon
or unarmed attacks. Spell attacks don’t deal any damage
beyond what’s listed in the spell description.
In rare cases, a spell might have you make some other
type of attack, such as a weapon Strike. Such attacks use
the normal rules and attack bonus for that type of attack.
Identifying Spells
Sometimes you need to identify a spell, especially if its
effects are not obvious right away. If you notice a spell
being cast, and you have prepared that spell or have it
in your repertoire, you automatically know what the
spell is, including the level to which it is heightened.
If you want to identify a spell but don’t have it
prepared or in your repertoire, you must spend an
action on your turn to attempt to identify it using
Recall Knowledge. You typically notice a spell being
cast by seeing its visual manifestations or hearing its
verbal casting components. Identifying long-lasting
spells that are already in place requires using Identify
Magic instead of Recall Knowledge because you don’t
have the advantage of watching the spell being cast.
Counteracting
Some spells, such as dispel magic, can be used to eliminate
the effects of other spells. At least one creature, object, or
manifestation of the spell you are trying to counteract must
be within range of the spell that you are using. You attempt
a counteract check (page 458) using your spellcasting ability
modifier and your proficiency bonus for spell attack rolls.
Hostile Actions
Sometimes spell effects prevent a target from using
hostile actions, or the spell ends if a creature uses any
hostile actions. A hostile action is one that can harm or
damage another creature, whether directly or indirectly,
but not one that a creature is unaware could cause harm.
For instance, lobbing a fireball into a crowd would be
a hostile action, but opening a door and accidentally
freeing a horrible monster would not be. The GM is the
final arbitrator of what constitutes a hostile action.
Setting Triggers
If a spell is meant to respond only to certain events or
under certain conditions—such as magic mouth—it might
require you to set a trigger. This is a simple sensory cue
that causes the spell to activate. The spell activates as a
reaction when the spell’s sensor observes something that
fits its trigger. Depending on the spell, the trigger might
be the presence of a type of creature, such as “red-haired
dwarven women,” or it could be an observed action, such
as “whenever someone enters the spell’s area.”
Disguises and illusions fool the spell as long as they
appear to match its parameters. For a spell to detect
something visually, the spell’s origin point must have line
of sight. Darkness doesn’t prevent this, but invisibility
305
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
does, as does a successful Stealth check to Hide (against
the spell’s DC). For auditory detection, line of sight isn’t
necessary, though the sound must be audible at the spell’s
origin point. A Stealth check to Sneak can fool the sensor.
Walls
Spells that create walls list the depth, length, and height of
the wall, also specifying how it can be positioned. Some
walls can be shaped; you can manipulate the wall into a
form other than a straight line, choosing its contiguous path
square by square. The path of a shaped wall can’t enter the
same space more than once, but it can double back so one
section is adjacent to another section of the wall.
Reading Spells
Each spell uses the following format. Entries appear only
when applicable, so not all spells will have every entry
described here. The spell’s name line also lists the type of
spell if it’s a cantrip or focus spell, as well as the level.
SPELL NAME SPELL (LEVEL)
TRAITS
Tradition This entry lists the magical traditions the spell
belongs to. Some feats or other abilities might add a spell to
your spell list even if you don’t follow the listed traditions.
Cast The number of actions required to Cast the Spell are listed
here. Spells that can be cast during a single turn have the
appropriate icon, as do those that can be cast as a free action
or a reaction. Spells that take longer to cast list the time
required, such as “1 minute.” After this, the spell’s components
are listed. If Casting the Spell has a cost, requirements, or a
trigger, that information is also listed in this section. A cost
includes any money, valuable materials, or other resources
that must be expended to cast the spell.
Range, Area, and Targets This entry lists the range of the spell,
the area it affects, and the targets it can affect, if any. If none
of these entries are present, the spell affects only the caster.
Saving Throw and Duration If a spell allows the target to attempt
a saving throw, the type of save appears here. Any details on
the particular results and timing of the save appear in the text
unless the entry specifies a basic saving throw, which follows
the rules found on page 449. If the spell requires a save only
under certain circumstances or at a certain time, this entry
is omitted, since the text needs to explain it in more detail. A
spell that doesn’t list a duration takes place instantaneously,
and anything created by it persists after the spell.
A horizontal line follows saving throws and duration, and the
effects of the spell are described after this line. This section
might also detail the possible results of a saving throw: critical
success, success, failure, and critical failure.
Heightened (level) If the spell can be heightened, the effects
of heightening it appear at the end of the stat block.
Core Rulebook
306
Spell Lists
These lists include the spells for each
tradition, including cantrips. (Focus
spells appear on pages 386–407.)
A superscript “H” indicates a spell
has extra effects when heightened,
and a spell whose rarity is greater
than common has a superscript
with the first letter of that rarity. An
abbreviation in parentheses indicates
a spell’s school.
Arcane Spells
Arcane Cantrips
Acid SplashH (evo): Damage creatures
with acid.
Chill TouchH (nec): Your touch hurts the
living or disorients undead.
Dancing Lights (evo): Create four
floating lights you can move.
DazeH (enc): Damage a creature’s mind
and possibly stun it.
Detect MagicH (div): Sense whether
magic is nearby.
Electric ArcH (evo): Zap one or two
creatures with lightning.
Ghost SoundH (ill): Make false sounds.
LightH (evo): Make an object glow.
Mage HandH (evo): Command a floating
hand to move an object.
MessageH (ill): Speak a message to a
distant creature, who can reply.
Prestidigitation (evo): Perform a minor
magical trick.
Produce FlameH (evo): Kindle small
flames to attack close or at range.
Ray of FrostH (evo): Damage a creature
with cold.
Read AuraH (div): Detect if an object is
magical, and determine the school of
its magic.
ShieldH (abj): A shield of magical force
blocks attacks and magic missiles.
SigilH (tra): Leave a magical mark.
TanglefootH (con): Conjure a vine to
entangle a creature.
Telekinetic ProjectileH (evo): Fling an
object at a creature.
Arcane 1st-Level Spells
Air Bubble (con): React to create air for
a creature to breathe.
AlarmH (abj): Be alerted if a creature
enters a warded area.
Ant Haul (tra): Target can carry more.
Burning HandsH (evo): A small cone of
flame rushes from your hands.
CharmH (enc): A humanoid becomes
more friendly to you.
Color Spray (ill): Swirling colors dazzle
or stun creatures.
CommandH (enc): Bid a creature to
approach, run, release something, lie
prone, or stand up.
Create Water (con): Conjure 2 gallons
of water.
FearH (enc): Frighten a creature,
possibly making it flee.
Feather Fall (abj): React to slow a
creature’s fall.
Fleet Step (tra): Make your Speed much
faster.
Floating Disk (con): A disk of energy
follows you, carrying objects.
Goblin Pox (nec): Infect a creature with
goblin pox.
Grease (con): Coat a surface or object in
slippery grease.
Grim TendrilsH (nec): Creatures in a line
take negative damage and bleed.
Gust of Wind (evo): Wind blows out
fires and knocks back objects and
creatures.
Hydraulic PushH (evo): Damage and
push a creature with a blast of water.
Illusory DisguiseH (ill): Make yourself
look like a different creature.
Illusory ObjectH (ill): Form a convincing
illusion of an object.
Item FacadeH (ill): Disguise an item to
look perfect or shoddy.
JumpH (tra): Make an impressive leap.
LockH (abj): Make a lock hard to open.
LongstriderH (tra): Increase your Speed
for an hour.
Mage ArmorH (abj): Ward yourself with
magical armor.
Magic AuraU, H (ill): Change how an
item’s magic appears to detecting
spells.
Magic MissileH (evo): Pelt creatures
with unerring bolts of magical force.
Magic Weapon (tra): Make a weapon
temporarily magical.
MendingH (tra): Repair one non-magical
item.
Negate AromaH (abj): Suppress a
creature’s scent.
Pest FormH (tra): Turn into a
nonthreatening animal.
Ray of Enfeeblement (nec): Sap a
creature’s strength.
Shocking GraspH (evo): Zap a creature
with electricity.
SleepH (enc): Cause creatures in a small
area to fall asleep.
Spider Sting (nec): Damage a creature
and afflict it with spider venom.
Summon AnimalH (con): Conjure an
animal to fight on your behalf.
Summon ConstructH (con): Conjure a
construct to fight on your behalf.
True Strike (div): Make your next
attack especially accurate.
Unseen Servant (con): Create an
invisible creature to help you.
VentriloquismH (ill): Throw your voice.
Arcane 2nd-Level Spells
Acid ArrowH (evo): Magical arrow deals
acid damage persistently.
Blur (ill): Cause a target’s form to
become blurry and hard to hit.
Comprehend LanguageH (div): A
creature understands one language.
Continual FlameH (evo): A magical
flame burns indefinitely.
Create FoodH (con): Conjure food that
can feed multiple creatures.
DarknessH (evo): Suppress all light in
an area.
DarkvisionH (div): See in the dark.
Deafness (nec): Make a creature deaf.
Dispel Magic (abj): End a spell or
suppress an item’s magic.
Endure ElementsH (abj): Protect a
creature from severe cold or heat.
EnlargeH (tra): A creature grows in size.
False LifeH (nec): Gain temporary HP.
Flaming SphereH (evo): A ball of fire
rolls about at your command.
Gentle ReposeH (nec): A corpse doesn’t
decay and can’t become undead.
Glitterdust (evo): Sparkling dust breaks
invisibility and impedes vision.
Hideous Laughter (enc): Fits of laughter
make a creature unable to take all its
actions.
Humanoid FormH (tra): Take the shape
of a humanoid.
Illusory CreatureH (ill): Form a
convincing illusion of a creature.
InvisibilityH (ill): A creature can’t be
seen until it attacks.
Knock (tra): Make a door, lock, or
container easier to open, and
possibly open it immediately.
Magic Mouth (ill): Make an illusory
mouth appear to speak a message.
Mirror Image (ill): Illusory duplicates of
you cause attacks to miss.
Misdirection (ill): Cause one creature’s
auras to appear to be another’s.
Obscuring Mist (con): Conceal creatures
in a cloud of mist.
Phantom SteedH (con): Conjure a
magical horse.
Resist EnergyH (abj): Protect a creature
from one type of energy damage.
See InvisibilityH (div): See invisible
creatures and objects.
ShrinkH (tra): Reduce a willing creature
to Tiny size.
Spectral Hand (nec): Semicorporeal
hand touches creatures to target
them with your spells.
Spider ClimbH (tra): Give a creature a
climb Speed.
Summon ElementalH (con): Conjure an
elemental to fight on your behalf.
Telekinetic Maneuver (evo):
Disarm, Shove, or Trip a creature
telekinetically.
Touch of Idiocy (enc): Dull a target’s
mind with a touch.
Water BreathingH (tra): Allow creatures
to breathe underwater.
307
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Water WalkH (tra): Buoy a creature so
it can walk on water.
WebH (con): Form a web that keeps
creatures from moving.
Arcane 3rd-Level Spells
Bind Undead (nec): Take control of a
mindless undead.
Blindness (nec): Strike a target blind.
Clairaudience (div): Hear through an
invisible magical sensor.
Dream MessageH (enc): Send a message
that arrives in a dream.
Earthbind (tra): Bring a flying creature
to the ground.
Enthrall (enc): Your speech makes
creatures fascinated with you.
Feet to FinsH (tra): Turn a creature’s
feet into fins, enabling it swim but
slowing it on land.
FireballH (evo): An explosion of fire in
an area burns creatures.
Ghostly Weapon (tra): Make a weapon
affect incorporeal creatures.
Glyph of Warding (abj): Store a spell in
a symbol to make a trap.
HasteH (tra): Speed up a creature so it
can attack or move more often.
Hypnotic Pattern (ill): Shifting colors
dazzle and fascinate creatures.
Invisibility SphereH (ill): You and
creatures near you become invisible
as you explore.
Levitate (evo): Float an object or
creature a few feet off the ground.
Lightning BoltH (evo): Lightning strikes
all creatures in a line.
LocateU, H (div): Learn the direction to
an object.
Meld into Stone (tra): Meld into a block
of stone.
Mind ReadingU (div): Read a creature’s
surface thoughts.
NondetectionU (abj): Protect a creature
or object from detection.
ParalyzeH (enc): Freeze a humanoid in
place.
Secret Page (ill): Alter the appearance
of a page.
Shrink Item (tra): Reduce an object to
the size of a coin.
SlowH (tra): Make a creature slower,
reducing its actions.
Stinking Cloud (con): Form a cloud that
sickens creatures.
Vampiric TouchH (nec): Deal negative
damage and gain temporary HP with
a touch.
Wall of Wind (evo): Create a wall
of gusting winds that hinders
movement and ranged attacks.
Arcane 4th-Level Spells
Aerial FormH (tra): Turn into a flying
combatant.
BlinkH (con): Flit between the planes,
vanishing and reappearing.
Clairvoyance (div): See through an
invisible magical sensor.
ConfusionH (enc): Befuddle a creature,
making it act randomly.
CreationH (con): Make a temporary
object.
Detect ScryingU, H (div): Find out if
scrying effects are in the area.
Dimension DoorH (con): Teleport
yourself up to 120 feet.
Dimensional Anchor (abj): Keep a
creature from teleporting or traveling
to other planes.
Discern LiesU (div): Expertly detect lies
and falsehoods.
Fire ShieldH (evo): Flames protect you
from cold and harm those that touch
you.
FlyH (tra): Cause the target creature to
gain a fly Speed.
Freedom of Movement (abj): A creature
overcomes hindrances to its
movement.
Gaseous Form (tra): Turn a willing
creature into a flying cloud.
Globe of InvulnerabilityU (abj): Magical
sphere counteracts spells that would
enter it.
Hallucinatory TerrainU, H (ill): A natural
environment appears to be another
kind of terrain.
Nightmare (ill): Plague a creature’s
dreams with disturbing nightmares.
Outcast’s Curse (enc): Curse a creature
to be off-putting and grating.
Phantasmal KillerH (ill): Place a
fearsome image in a creature’s mind
to scare and possibly kill it.
Private SanctumU (abj): Black fog
prevents sensing, scrying, and
mind-reading on anyone within.
Resilient Sphere (abj): Create a sphere
of force that blocks anything that
would come through.
Rope TrickU (con): Animate a rope that
rises to an extradimensional hiding
place.
Shape Stone (tra): Reshape a cube of
stone.
Solid Fog (con): Conjure heavy fog that
obscures sight and is hard to move
through.
Spell Immunity (abj): Name a spell to
negate its effects on you.
StoneskinH (abj): Harden a creature’s
skin into durable stone.
SuggestionH (enc): Suggest a course of
action a creature must follow.
TelepathyH (div): Communicate
telepathically with any creatures
near you.
VeilH (ill): Disguise many creatures as
other creatures.
Wall of FireH (evo): Create a blazing
wall burns creatures that pass
through.
Weapon StormH (evo): Multiply a
weapon you hold and attack many
creatures with it.
Arcane 5th-Level Spells
BanishmentH (abj): Send a creature
back to its home plane.
Black Tentacles (con): Tentacles in an
area grab creatures.
Chromatic WallH (abj): A wall of light
offers a unique protection based on
its color.
Cloak of Colors (ill): Bright colors
dazzle creatures near the target,
and attacks cause blinding flashes
of light.
CloudkillH (nec): Poison creatures in a
cloud that moves away from you.
Cone of ColdH (evo): Bitter cold
damages creatures in a cone.
Control Water (evo): Raise or lower
water in a large area.
Crushing DespairH (enc): Make a
creature sob uncontrollably.
Drop DeadU, H (ill): The target appears to
die but actually turns invisible.
Elemental FormH (tra): Turn into an
elemental.
False VisionU (ill): Trick a scrying spell.
HallucinationH (ill): A creature believes
one thing is another, can’t detect
something, or sees something that’s
not really there.
Illusory SceneH (ill): Create an
imaginary scene containing multiple
creatures and objects.
Mariner’s Curse (nec): Infect a creature
with the curse of the rolling sea.
Mind ProbeU (div): Uncover knowledge
and memories in a creature’s mind.
PasswallU, H (con): Form an earthen
tunnel through a wall.
Prying Eye (div): An invisible eye
transmits what it sees to you.
Sending (div): Send a mental message
to a creature anywhere on the planet
and get a reply.
Shadow Siphon (ill): React to lessen
the damage from an enemy’s spell by
making it partially illusion.
Shadow WalkU (con): Travel rapidly via
the Shadow Plane.
Subconscious SuggestionH (enc): Plant
a mental suggestion that must be
followed when a trigger occurs.
Summon DragonH (con): Conjure a
dragon to fight on your behalf.
Telekinetic Haul (evo): Move a large object.
Telepathic BondU (div): Link minds with
willing creatures to communicate
telepathically at great distances.
Tongues U, H (div): Let a creature
understand and speak all languages.
Wall of IceH (evo): Sculpt a foot-thick
wall of ice that blocks sight and can
chill creatures.
Wall of StoneH (con): Shape a wall of stone.
Core Rulebook
308
Arcane 6th-Level Spells
Baleful Polymorph (tra): Transform a
creature into a harmless animal.
Chain LightningH (evo): Lightning jumps
from creature to creature.
Collective TranspositionH (con):
Teleport up to two creatures to new
positions near you.
DisintegrateH (evo): Reduce a creature
or object to dust.
DominateU, H (enc): A humanoid must
obey your orders.
Dragon FormH (tra): Turn into a dragon.
Feeblemind (enc): Stupefy a creature
permanently.
Flesh To Stone (tra): Turn a living
creature to a stone statue.
Mislead (ill): Turn invisible and create
a duplicate of yourself who acts like
you.
Phantasmal CalamityH (ill): Damage a
creature mentally with visions of an
apocalypse.
Purple Worm Sting (nec): Damage a
creature and infect it with purple
worm venom.
Repulsion (abj): Prevent creatures from
approaching you.
ScryingU (div): Spy on a creature.
Spellwrack (abj): Curse a creature to be
harmed when a spell is cast on it and
lower the duration of its spells.
TeleportU, H (con): Transport you and
willing creatures a great distance.
True Seeing (div): See through illusions
and transmutations.
Vampiric ExsanguinationH (nec): Draw
blood and life force from creatures
in a cone.
Vibrant Pattern (ill): Make a pattern of
lights that dazzles and blinds.
Wall of ForceH (evo): Create an invisible
and durable wall of magical force.
Arcane 7th-Level Spells
ContingencyH (abj): Set up a spell to
trigger later under your choice of
circumstances.
Dimensional LockU (abj): Prevent
teleportation and planar travel.
Duplicate FoeH (con): Create a
temporary duplicate of an enemy
that fights for you.
Eclipse BurstH (nec): A globe of
darkness deals cold damage, hurts
the living, and overcomes light.
Energy AegisH (abj): A creature gains
resistance to acid, cold, electricity,
fire, force, and sonic.
Fiery BodyH (tra): Turn your body into
living flame.
Magnificent MansionU (con): Conjure a
secure dwelling in a demiplane.
Mask of TerrorH (ill): A creature’s
fearsome illusory appearance
frightens observers.
Plane ShiftU (con): Transport creatures
to another plane of existence.
Power Word BlindU, H (enc): Utter a
word that blinds a creature.
Prismatic Spray (evo): Shoot rainbow
beams that have various effects on
creatures in a cone.
Project ImageH (ill): Make an illusion
of yourself you can cast spells through.
Reverse GravityU (evo): Flip the
gravitational pull in an area.
Spell TurningU (abj): Reflect spells back
at their caster.
True Target (div): Make multiple
attacks against a creature especially
accurate.
Warp Mind (enc): Confuse a creature,
possibly permanently.
Arcane 8th-Level Spells
Antimagic FieldR (abj): Magic doesn’t
function in an area around you.
Disappearance (ill): Make a creature
invisible, silent, and undetectable by
any and all senses.
Discern LocationU (div): Discover
a target’s exact location within
unlimited range.
Dream Council (ill): Communicate
through a shared dream.
EarthquakeH (evo): Shake the ground
with a devastating earthquake.
Horrid WiltingH (nec): Pull moisture
from creatures, damaging them.
Maze (con): Trap a creature in an
extradimensional maze.
Mind BlankU (abj): Protect a creature
from mental magic and some
divinations.
Monstrosity FormH (tra): Turn into a
powerful monster.
Polar RayH (evo): Bitter cold damages
and drains a creature.
Power Word StunU, H (enc): Utter a word
that stuns a creature.
Prismatic Wall (abj): Form a protective
wall with seven chromatic layers.
Scintillating Pattern (ill): Cause an
array of color that dazzles, confuses,
and stuns.
Uncontrollable Dance (enc): Overcome
a target with an all-consuming urge
to dance.
Unrelenting Observation (div): You and
other creatures use scrying to track
a subject exactly.
Arcane 9th-Level Spells
DisjunctionU (abj): Deactivate or
destroy a magic item.
Foresight (div): Sense when a creature
is in danger and React to protect it
with good fortune.
ImplosionH (evo): Make a creature
collapse in on itself.
MassacreH (nec): Instantly kill multiple
creatures.
Meteor SwarmH (evo): Call down four
blazing meteors that explode.
Power Word KillU, H (enc): Utter a word
that slays a creature.
Prismatic Sphere (abj): Form a
protective sphere composed of seven
chromatic layers.
Resplendent Mansion (con): Conjure a
mansion that lasts for a day.
Shapechange (tra): Transform into a
form of your choice repeatedly.
Telepathic Demand (enc): Send a
mental message that impels a
creature toward a course of action.
Weird (ill): Frighten, deal mental
damage, and possibly kill large
numbers of creatures.
Arcane 10th-Level Spells
Cataclysm (evo): Call an instant,
damaging cataclysm.
GateU (con): Tear open a portal to
another plane.
RemakeU (con): Recreate a destroyed object.
Time Stop (tra): Briefly stop time for
everything but you.
Wish (div): Make a wish to duplicate
arcane spells.
Divine Spells
Divine Cantrips
Chill TouchH (nec): Your touch hurts the
living or disorients undead.
DazeH (enc): Damage a creature’s mind
and possibly stun it.
Detect MagicH (div): Sense whether
magic is nearby.
Disrupt UndeadH (nec): Damage undead
with positive energy.
Divine LanceH (evo): Throw divine
energy that damages based on your
deity’s alignment.
Forbidding WardH (abj): Protect an ally
against one specific enemy.
Guidance (div): Divine guidance
improves one roll.
Know DirectionH (div): Find true north.
LightH (evo): Make an object glow.
MessageH (ill): Speak a message to a
distant creature, who can reply.
Prestidigitation (evo): Perform a minor
magical trick.
Read AuraH (div): Detect if an object is
magical, and determine the school of
its magic.
ShieldH (abj): A shield of magical force
blocks attacks and magic missiles.
SigilH (tra): Leave a magical mark.
Stabilize (nec): Stabilize a dying
creature.
Divine 1st-Level Spells
Air Bubble (con): React to create air for
a creature to breathe.
AlarmH (abj): Be alerted if a creature
enters a warded area.
309
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Bane (enc): Weaken enemies’ attacks in
an aura around you.
Bless (enc): Strengthen allies’ attacks in
an aura around you.
CommandH (enc): Bid a creature to
approach, run, release something, lie
prone, or stand up.
Create Water (con): Conjure 2 gallons
of water.
Detect AlignmentU, H (div): See auras of
a chosen alignment.
Detect PoisonU, H (div): Determine
whether an object or creature is
poisonous or venomous.
Disrupting WeaponsH (nec): Weapons
deal positive damage to undead.
FearH (enc): Frighten a creature,
possibly making it flee.
HarmH (nec): Negative energy harms
the living or heals the undead, either
a single creature or all in a burst.
HealH (nec): Positive energy heals the
living or harms the undead, either a
single creature or all in a burst.
LockH (abj): Make a lock hard to open.
Magic Weapon (tra): Make a weapon
temporarily magical.
MendingH (tra): Repair one non-magical
item.
ProtectionU (abj): Shield a creature
against those of a chosen alignment.
Purify Food And Drink (nec): Make
beverages and meals safe.
Ray of Enfeeblement (nec): Sap a
creature’s strength.
Sanctuary (abj): Protect a creature from
being attacked.
Spirit LinkH (nec): Continually transfer
your health to someone else.
VentriloquismH (ill): Throw your voice.
Divine 2nd-Level Spells
Augury (div): Predict whether a course
of action brings good fortune.
Calm Emotions (enc): Suppress strong
emotions and hostility.
Comprehend LanguageH (div): A
creature understands one language.
Continual FlameH (evo): A magical
flame burns indefinitely.
Create FoodH (con): Conjure food that
can feed multiple creatures.
DarknessH (evo): Suppress all light in
an area.
DarkvisionH (div): See in the dark.
Deafness (nec): Make a creature deaf.
Death Knell (nec): Finish off a creature
who’s near death.
Dispel Magic (abj): End a spell or
suppress an item’s magic.
Endure ElementsH (abj): Protect a
creature from severe cold or heat.
Enhance VictualsH (tra): Improve food
or drink and remove poisons.
Faerie Fire (evo): Colorful light prevents
creatures from being concealed or
invisible.
Gentle ReposeH (nec): A corpse doesn’t
decay and can’t become undead.
Ghoulish Cravings (nec): Infect a
creature with ghoul fever.
Remove FearH (enc): Free a creature
from its fright.
Remove ParalysisH (nec): Free a
creature from paralysis.
Resist EnergyH (abj): Protect a creature
from one type of energy damage.
RestorationH (nec): Reduce a condition
or lessen a toxin.
Restore SensesH (nec): Remove a
blinding or deafening effect.
See InvisibilityH (div): See invisible
creatures and objects.
Shield Other (nec): Absorb half the
damage an ally would take.
SilenceH (ill): Mute all sound from a
creature.
Sound BurstH (evo): Damage and
deafen creatures with a powerful din.
Spiritual WeaponH (evo): Materialize a
deific weapon of force that appears
and attacks repeatedly.
StatusH (div): Keep track of a willing
creature’s location and well-being.
Undetectable AlignmentU (abj): Make a
creature or object appear neutral to
alignment detection.
Water BreathingH (tra): Allow creatures
to breathe underwater.
Water WalkH (tra): Buoy a creature so
it can walk on water.
Divine 3rd-Level Spells
Bind Undead (nec): Take control of a
mindless undead.
Blindness (nec): Strike a target blind.
Chilling DarknessH (evo): Ray of
evil darkness deals cold damage,
counteracts light, and harms
celestials.
Circle of ProtectionU, H (abj): A creature
emits an aura that protects those
within against an alignment.
Crisis of FaithH (enc): Cause mental
damage and possibly make a
worshipper unable to cast spells.
Dream MessageH (enc): Send a message
that arrives in a dream.
Glyph of Warding (abj): Store a spell in
a symbol to make a trap.
HeroismH (enc): Stoke a creature’s
inner heroism to make it more
competent.
LocateU, H (div): Learn the direction to
an object.
Neutralize Poison (nec): Cure a poison
afflicting a creature.
Remove Disease (nec): Cure a disease
afflicting a creature.
Sanctified Ground (abj): Create a
24-hour area of protection against
aberrations, celestials, dragons,
fiends, or undead.
Searing LightH (evo): A ray of burning
light deals extra damage to undead
and counteracts darkness.
Vampiric TouchH (nec): Deal negative
damage and gain temporary HP with
a touch.
Wanderer’s Guide (div): Find an ideal
route to a location.
Zone of TruthU (enc): Compel creatures
to tell the truth.
Divine 4th-Level Spells
Air Walk (tra): Walk on air as though it
were solid ground.
Anathematic ReprisalH (enc): Cause
mental pain to one who commits
anathema against your deity.
Dimensional Anchor (abj): Keep a
creature from teleporting or traveling
to other planes.
Discern LiesU (div): Expertly detect lies
and falsehoods.
Divine WrathH (evo): Damage and
hinder creatures of alignments
opposed by your deity.
Freedom of Movement (abj): A creature
overcomes hindrances to its
movement.
Globe of InvulnerabilityU (abj): Magical
sphere counteracts spells that would
enter it.
Holy CascadeH (evo): Turn a vial of holy
water into an explosion of blessed
water.
Outcast’s Curse (enc): Curse a creature
to be off-putting and grating.
Read OmensU (div): Get a piece of
advice about an upcoming event.
Remove Curse (nec): Counteract a curse
afflicting a creature.
Spell Immunity (abj): Name a spell to
negate its effects on you.
Talking CorpseU (nec): Have a corpse
answer three questions.
Vital BeaconH (nec): Radiate vitality
that heals creatures that touch you.
Divine 5th-Level Spells
Abyssal Plague (nec): Inflict a draining
curse.
BanishmentH (abj): Send a creature
back to its home plane.
Breath of Life (nec): React to revive a
creature at the moment of its death.
Death Ward (abj): Protect a creature
against negative energy.
Drop DeadU, H (ill): The target appears to
die but actually turns invisible.
Flame StrikeH (evo): Call divine fire
from the sky.
Prying Eye (div): An invisible eye
transmits what it sees to you.
Sending (div): Send a mental message
to a creature anywhere on the planet
and get a reply.
Shadow BlastH (evo): Shape a cone of
shadow to deal damage of a type you
choose.
Core Rulebook
310
Spiritual GuardianH (abj): Create a
magical guardian to attack at your
command and take damage for your
allies.
Summon CelestialH (con): Conjure a
celestial to fight on your behalf.
Summon FiendH (con): Conjure a fiend
to fight on your behalf.
TonguesU, H (div): Let a creature
understand and speak all languages.
Divine 6th-Level Spells
Blade BarrierH (evo): Form a wall of
swords made of force.
Field of LifeH (nec): Create a positive
energy field that heals those within.
Raise DeadU, H (nec): Return a dead
creature to life.
Repulsion (abj): Prevent creatures from
approaching you.
Righteous MightH (tra): Turn into a
battle form with divine armaments.
Spellwrack (abj): Curse a creature to be
harmed when a spell is cast on it and
lower the duration of its spells.
Spirit BlastH (nec): Damage a creature’s
spiritual essence.
Stone TellU (div): Speak to spirits within
natural stone.
Stone to Flesh (tra): Turn a creature
turned to stone back to flesh.
True Seeing (div): See through illusions
and transmutations.
Vampiric ExsanguinationH (nec): Draw
blood and life force from creatures
in a cone.
Zealous ConvictionH (enc): Instill
unshakable conviction and zeal in
willing creatures.
Divine 7th-Level Spells
Dimensional LockU (abj): Prevent
teleportation and planar travel.
Divine DecreeH (evo): Creatures of
alignments opposed by your deity
are damaged, enfeebled, paralyzed,
or banished.
Divine VesselH (tra): Take on aspects of
a servitor of your deity.
Eclipse BurstH (nec): A globe of
darkness deals cold damage, hurts
the living, and overcomes light.
Energy AegisH (abj): A creature gains
resistance to acid, cold, electricity,
fire, force, and sonic.
Ethereal JauntU, H (con): Use the
Ethereal Plane to move through
objects and into the air.
Finger of DeathH (nec): Point at a
creature to deal negative damage
and possibly kill it instantly.
Plane ShiftU (con): Transport creatures
to another plane of existence.
RegenerateH (nec): Cause a creature to
heal over time, regrow organs, and
reattach body parts.
SunburstH (evo): A globe of sunlight
deals fire damage, hurts undead, and
overcomes darkness.
Divine 8th-Level Spells
Antimagic FieldR (abj): Magic doesn’t
function in an area around you.
Discern LocationU (div): Discover
a target’s exact location within
unlimited range.
Divine Aura (abj): Allies in an aura have
better defenses and are protected
against one alignment.
Divine Inspiration (enc): Spiritual
energy recovers a creature’s
expended spell.
Moment of Renewal (nec): Give a day’s
recovery in an instant.
Spiritual Epidemic (nec): Weaken a
target with a communicable curse.
Divine 9th-Level Spells
Bind SoulU (nec): Imprison a dead
creature’s soul.
CrusadeU, H (enc): Creatures become
dedicated to a cause of your choice.
Foresight (div): Sense when a creature
is in danger and React to protect it
with good fortune.
MassacreH (nec): Instantly kill multiple
creatures.
Overwhelming Presence (enc): Take on
the majesty of a god.
Telepathic Demand (enc): Send a
mental message that impels a
creature toward a course of action.
Wail of the Banshee (nec): Scream,
dealing damage and draining
creatures.
Weapon of JudgmentH (evo): Form a
weapon to enforce war or peace.
Divine 10th-Level Spells
Avatar (tra): Transform into a battle
form determined by your deity.
GateU (con): Tear open a portal to
another plane.
Miracle (div): Ask for a blessing to
duplicate divine spells.
RemakeU (con): Recreate a destroyed
object.
Revival (nec): Heal creatures in an
area and return the dead to life
temporarily.
Occult Spells
Occult Cantrips
Chill TouchH (nec): Your touch hurts the
living or disorients undead.
Dancing Lights (evo): Create four
floating lights you can move.
DazeH (enc): Damage a creature’s mind
and possibly stun it.
Detect MagicH (div): Sense whether
magic is nearby.
Forbidding WardH (abj): Protect an ally
against one specific enemy.
Ghost SoundH (ill): Make false sounds.
Guidance (div): Divine guidance
improves one roll.
Know DirectionH (div): Find true north.
LightH (evo): Make an object glow.
Mage HandH (evo): Command a floating
hand to move an object.
MessageH (ill): Speak a message to a
distant creature, who can reply.
Prestidigitation (evo): Perform a minor
magical trick.
Read AuraH (div): Detect if an object is
magical, and determine the school of
its magic.
ShieldH (abj): A shield of magical force
blocks attacks and magic missiles.
SigilH (tra): Leave a magical mark.
Telekinetic ProjectileH (evo): Fling an
object at a creature.
Occult 1st-Level Spells
AlarmH (abj): Be alerted if a creature
enters a warded area.
Bane (enc): Weaken enemies’ attacks in
an aura around you.
Bless (enc): Strengthen allies’ attacks in
an aura around you.
CharmH (enc): A humanoid becomes
more friendly to you.
Color Spray (ill): Swirling colors dazzle
or stun creatures.
CommandH (enc): Bid a creature to
approach, run, release something, lie
prone, or stand up.
Detect AlignmentU, H (div): See auras of
a chosen alignment.
FearH (enc): Frighten a creature,
possibly making it flee.
Floating Disk (con): A disk of energy
follows you, carrying objects.
Grim TendrilsH (nec): Creatures in a line
take negative damage and bleed.
Illusory DisguiseH (ill): Make yourself
look like a different creature.
Illusory ObjectH (ill): Form a convincing
illusion of an object.
Item FacadeH (ill): Disguise an item to
look perfect or shoddy.
LockH (abj): Make a lock hard to open.
Mage ArmorH (abj): Ward yourself with
magical armor.
Magic AuraU, H (ill): Change how an
item’s magic appears to detecting
spells.
Magic MissileH (evo): Pelt creatures
with unerring bolts of magical force.
Magic Weapon (tra): Make a weapon
temporarily magical.
MendingH (tra): Repair one non-magical
item.
Mindlink (div): Mentally impart 10 minutes’
worth of information in an instant.
Phantom PainH (ill): Cause a creature
ongoing pain that sickens it.
ProtectionU (abj): Shield a creature
against those of a chosen alignment.
Ray of Enfeeblement (nec): Sap a
creature’s strength.
311
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Sanctuary (abj): Protect a creature from
being attacked.
SleepH (enc): Cause creatures in a small
area to fall asleep.
SootheH (nec): Heal the target and
bolster them against mental attacks.
Spirit LinkH (nec): Continually transfer
your health to someone else.
Summon FeyH (con): Conjure a fey to
fight on your behalf.
True Strike (div): Make your next
attack especially accurate.
Unseen Servant (con): Create an
invisible creature to help you.
VentriloquismH (ill): Throw your voice.
Occult 2nd-Level Spells
Augury (div): Predict whether a course
of action brings good fortune.
Blur (ill): Cause a target’s form to
become blurry and hard to hit.
Calm Emotions (enc): Suppress strong
emotions and hostility.
Comprehend LanguageH (div): A
creature understands one language.
Continual FlameH (evo): A magical
flame burns indefinitely.
DarknessH (evo): Suppress all light in
an area.
DarkvisionH (div): See in the dark.
Deafness (nec): Make a creature deaf.
Death Knell (nec): Finish off a creature
who’s near death.
Dispel Magic (abj): End a spell or
suppress an item’s magic.
Faerie Fire (evo): Colorful light prevents
creatures from being concealed or
invisible.
False LifeH (nec): Gain temporary HP.
Gentle ReposeH (nec): A corpse doesn’t
decay and can’t become undead.
Ghoulish Cravings (nec): Infect a
creature with ghoul fever.
Hideous Laughter (enc): Fits of laughter
make a creature unable to take all its
actions.
Humanoid FormH (tra): Take the shape
of a humanoid.
Illusory CreatureH (ill): Form a
convincing illusion of a creature.
InvisibilityH (ill): A creature can’t be
seen until it attacks.
Knock (tra): Make a door, lock, or
container easier to open, and
possibly open it immediately.
Magic Mouth (ill): Make an illusory
mouth appear to speak a message.
Mirror Image (ill): Illusory duplicates of
you cause attacks to miss.
Misdirection (ill): Cause one creature’s
auras to appear to be another’s.
ParanoiaH (ill): Make a creature believe
everyone is a threat.
Phantom SteedH (con): Conjure a
magical horse.
Remove FearH (enc): Free a creature
from its fright.
Remove ParalysisH (nec): Free a
creature from paralysis.
Resist EnergyH (abj): Protect a creature
from one type of energy damage.
RestorationH (nec): Reduce a condition
or lessen a toxin.
Restore SensesH (nec): Remove a
blinding or deafening effect.
See InvisibilityH (div): See invisible
creatures and objects.
ShatterH (evo): Shatter an object with a
high-frequency sonic attack.
SilenceH (ill): Mute all sound from a
creature.
Sound BurstH (evo): Damage and
deafen creatures with a powerful din.
Spectral Hand (nec): Create a semicorporeal
hand that touches creatures to target
them with your spells.
Spiritual WeaponH (evo): Materialize a
deific weapon of force that appears
and attacks repeatedly.
StatusH (div): Keep track of a willing
creature’s location and well-being.
Telekinetic Maneuver (evo):
Disarm, Shove, or Trip a creature
telekinetically.
Touch of Idiocy (enc): Dull a target’s
mind with a touch.
Undetectable AlignmentU (abj): Make a
creature or object appear neutral to
alignment detection.
Occult 3rd-Level Spells
Bind Undead (nec): Take control of a
mindless undead.
Blindness (nec): Strike a target blind.
Circle of ProtectionU, H (abj): A creature
emits an aura that protects those
within against an alignment.
Clairaudience (div): Hear through an
invisible magical sensor.
Dream MessageH (enc): Send a message
that arrives in a dream.
Enthrall (enc): Your speech makes
creatures fascinated with you.
Ghostly Weapon (tra): Make a weapon
affect incorporeal creatures.
Glyph of Warding (abj): Store a spell in
a symbol to make a trap.
HasteH (tra): Speed up a creature so it
can attack or move more often.
HeroismH (enc): Stoke a creature’s inner
heroism to make it more competent.
Hypercognition (div): Recall massive
amounts of information in an instant.
Hypnotic Pattern (ill): Shifting colors
dazzle and fascinate creatures.
Invisibility SphereH (ill): You and
creatures near you become invisible
as you explore.
Levitate (evo): Float an object or
creature a few feet off the ground.
LocateU, H (div): Learn the direction to
an object.
Mind ReadingU (div): Read a creature’s
surface thoughts.
NondetectionU (abj): Protect a creature
or object from detection.
ParalyzeH (enc): Freeze a humanoid in
place.
Secret Page (ill): Alter the appearance
of a page.
SlowH (tra): Make a creature slower,
reducing its actions.
Vampiric TouchH (nec): Deal negative
damage and gain temporary HP with
a touch.
Wanderer’s Guide (div): Find an ideal
route to a location.
Zone of TruthU (enc): Designate an area
where creatures are compelled to be
truthful.
Occult 4th-Level Spells
BlinkH (con): Flit between the planes,
vanishing and reappearing.
Clairvoyance (div): See through an
invisible magical sensor.
ConfusionH (enc): Befuddle a creature,
making it act randomly.
Detect ScryingU, H (div): Find out if
scrying effects are in the area.
Dimension DoorH (con): Teleport
yourself up to 120 feet.
Dimensional Anchor (abj): Keep a
creature from teleporting or traveling
to other planes.
Discern LiesU (div): Expertly detect lies
and falsehoods.
FlyH (tra): Cause the target creature to
gain a fly Speed.
Gaseous Form (tra): Turn a willing
creature into a flying cloud.
GlibnessU (enc): Lie with impunity.
Globe of InvulnerabilityU (abj): Magical
sphere counteracts spells that would
enter it.
Hallucinatory TerrainU, H (ill): A natural
environment appears to be another
kind of terrain.
Modify MemoryU, H (div): Change or
implant memories.
Nightmare (ill): Plague a creature’s
dreams with disturbing nightmares.
Outcast’s Curse (enc): Curse a creature
to be off-putting and grating.
Phantasmal KillerH (ill): Place a
fearsome image in a creature’s mind
to scare and possibly kill it.
Private SanctumU (abj): Black fog
prevents sensing, scrying, and
mind-reading on anyone within.
Read OmensU (div): Get a piece of
advice about an upcoming event.
Remove Curse (nec): Counteract a curse
afflicting a creature.
Resilient Sphere (abj): Create a sphere of
force that blocks anything that would
come through.
Rope TrickU (con): Animate a rope that rises
to an extradimensional hiding place.
Spell Immunity (abj): Name a spell to
negate its effects on you.
Core Rulebook
312
SuggestionH (enc): Suggest a course of
action a creature must follow.
Talking CorpseU (nec): Have a corpse
answer three questions.
TelepathyH (div): Communicate
telepathically with any creatures
near you.
VeilH (ill): Disguise many creatures as
other creatures.
Occult 5th-Level Spells
Abyssal Plague (nec): Inflict a draining
curse.
BanishmentH (abj): Send a creature
back to its home plane.
Black Tentacles (con): Tentacles in an
area grab creatures.
Chromatic WallH (abj): A wall of light
offers a unique protection based on
its color.
Cloak of Colors (ill): Bright colors
dazzle creatures near the target,
and attacks cause blinding flashes
of light.
Crushing DespairH (enc): Make a
creature sob uncontrollably.
Death Ward (abj): Protect a creature
against negative energy.
Dreaming Potential (enc): The target
retrains in its dreams.
False VisionU (ill): Trick a scrying spell.
HallucinationH (ill): A creature believes
one thing is another, can’t detect
something, or sees something that’s
not really there.
Illusory SceneH (ill): Create an
imaginary scene containing multiple
creatures and objects.
Mariner’s Curse (nec): Infect a creature
with the curse of the rolling sea.
Mind ProbeU (div): Uncover knowledge
and memories in a creature’s mind.
Prying Eye (div): An invisible eye
transmits what it sees to you.
Sending (div): Send a mental message
to a creature anywhere on the planet
and get a reply.
Shadow BlastH (evo): Shape a cone of
shadow to deal damage of a type you
choose.
Shadow Siphon (ill): React to lessen
the damage from an enemy’s spell by
making it partially illusion.
Shadow WalkU (con): Travel rapidly via
the Shadow Plane.
Subconscious SuggestionH (enc): Plant
a mental suggestion that must be
followed when a trigger occurs.
Summon EntityH (con): Conjure an
aberration to fight on your behalf.
Synaptic Pulse (enc): Slow creatures
with a mental blast.
SynesthesiaH (div): Rewire a creature’s
senses.
Telekinetic Haul (evo): Move a large
object.
Telepathic BondU (div): Link minds with
willing creatures to communicate
telepathically at great distances.
TonguesU, H (div): Let a creature
understand and speak all languages.
Occult 6th-Level Spells
Collective TranspositionH (con):
Teleport up to two creatures to new
positions near you.
DominateU, H (enc): A humanoid must
obey your orders.
Feeblemind (enc): Stupefy a creature
permanently.
Mislead (ill): Turn invisible and create
a duplicate of yourself who acts like
you.
Phantasmal CalamityH (ill): Damage a
creature mentally with visions of an
apocalypse.
Repulsion (abj): Prevent creatures from
approaching you.
ScryingU (div): Spy on a creature.
Spellwrack (abj): Curse a creature to be
harmed when a spell is cast on it and
lower the duration of its spells.
Spirit BlastH (nec): Damage a creature’s
spiritual essence.
TeleportU, H (con): Transport you and
willing creatures a great distance.
True Seeing (div): See through illusions
and transmutations.
Vampiric ExsanguinationH (nec): Draw
blood and life force from creatures
in a cone.
Vibrant Pattern (ill): Make a pattern of
lights that dazzles and blinds.
Wall of ForceH (evo): Create an invisible
and durable wall of magical force.
Zealous ConvictionH (enc): Instill
unshakable conviction and zeal in
willing creatures.
Occult 7th-Level Spells
Dimensional LockU (abj): Prevent
teleportation and planar travel.
Duplicate FoeH (con): Create a
temporary duplicate of an enemy
that fights for you.
Energy AegisH (abj): A creature gains
resistance to acid, cold, electricity,
fire, force, and sonic.
Ethereal JauntU, H (con): Use the
Ethereal Plane to move through
objects and into the air.
Magnificent MansionU (con): Conjure a
secure dwelling in a demiplane.
Mask of TerrorH (ill): A creature’s
fearsome illusory appearance
frightens observers.
Plane ShiftU (con): Transport creatures
to another plane of existence.
PossessionU, H (nec): Send your mind
and soul into another creature’s
body.
Prismatic Spray (evo): Shoot rainbow
beams that have various effects on
creatures in a cone.
Project ImageH (ill): Make an illusion of
yourself you can cast spells through.
RetrocognitionH (div): Sense
impressions of past events at your
location.
Reverse GravityU (evo): Flip the
gravitational pull in an area.
True Target (div): Make multiple
attacks against a creature especially
accurate.
Visions of DangerH (ill): Create a vision
of horrid, swarming creatures that
causes mental damage.
Warp Mind (enc): Confuse a creature,
possibly permanently.
Occult 8th-Level Spells
Antimagic FieldR (abj): Magic doesn’t
function in an area around you.
Disappearance (ill): Make a creature
invisible, silent, and undetectable by
any and all senses.
Discern LocationU (div): Discover
a target’s exact location within
unlimited range.
Dream Council (ill): Communicate
through a shared dream.
Maze (con): Trap a creature in an
extradimensional maze.
Mind BlankU (abj): Protect a creature
from mental magic and some
divinations.
Prismatic Wall (abj): Form a protective
wall with seven chromatic layers.
Scintillating Pattern (ill): Cause an
array of color that dazzles, confuses,
and stuns.
Spirit SongH (nec): Sing an eldritch song
that damages any creature that has
a spirit.
Spiritual Epidemic (nec): Weaken a
target with a communicable curse.
Uncontrollable Dance (enc): Overcome
a target with an all-consuming urge
to dance.
Unrelenting Observation (div): You and
other creatures use scrying to track
a subject exactly.
Occult 9th-Level Spells
Bind SoulU (nec): Imprison a dead
creature’s soul.
Foresight (div): Sense when a creature
is in danger and React to protect it
with good fortune.
Overwhelming Presence (enc): Take on
the majesty of a god.
Prismatic Sphere (abj): Form a
protective sphere composed of seven
chromatic layers.
Resplendent Mansion (con): Conjure a
mansion that lasts for a day.
Telepathic Demand (enc): Send a
mental message that impels a
creature toward a course of action.
Unfathomable Song (enc): Song
debilitates creatures in weird ways.
313
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Wail of the Banshee (nec): Scream, dealing
damage and draining creatures.
Weird (ill): Frighten, deal mental
damage, and possibly kill large
numbers of creatures.
Occult 10th-Level Spells
Alter Reality (div): Warp reality to
duplicate occult spells.
Fabricated Truth (enc): Make creatures
believe something is fact.
GateU (con): Tear open a portal to
another plane.
RemakeU (con): Recreate a destroyed
object.
Time Stop (tra): Briefly stop time for
everything but you.
Primal Spells
Primal Cantrips
Acid SplashH (evo): Damage creatures
with acid.
Dancing Lights (evo): Create four
floating lights you can move.
Detect MagicH (div): Sense whether
magic is nearby.
Disrupt UndeadH (nec): Damage undead
with positive energy.
Electric ArcH (evo): Zap one or two
creatures with lightning.
Guidance (div): Divine guidance
improves one roll.
Know DirectionH (div): Find true north.
LightH (evo): Make an object glow.
Prestidigitation (evo): Perform a minor
magical trick.
Produce FlameH (evo): Kindle small
flames to attack close or at range.
Ray of FrostH (evo): Damage a creature
with cold.
Read AuraH (div): Detect if an object is
magical, and determine the school of
its magic.
SigilH (tra): Leave a magical mark.
Stabilize (nec): Stabilize a dying
creature.
TanglefootH (con): Conjure a vine to
entangle a creature.
Primal 1st-Level Spells
Air Bubble (con): React to create air for
a creature to breathe.
AlarmH (abj): Be alerted if a creature
enters a warded area.
Ant Haul (tra): Target can carry more.
Burning HandsH (evo): A small cone of
flame rushes from your hands.
CharmH (enc): A humanoid becomes
more friendly to you.
Create Water (con): Conjure 2 gallons
of water.
Detect PoisonU, H (div): Determine
whether an object or creature is
poisonous or venomous.
FearH (enc): Frighten a creature,
possibly making it flee.
Feather Fall (abj): React to slow a
creature’s fall.
Fleet Step (tra): Make your Speed much
faster.
Goblin Pox (nec): Infect a creature with
goblin pox.
Grease (con): Coat a surface or object in
slippery grease.
Gust of Wind (evo): Wind blows out
fires and knocks back objects and
creatures.
HealH (nec): Positive energy heals the
living or harms the undead, either a
single creature or all in a burst.
Hydraulic PushH (evo): Damage and
push a creature with a blast of water.
JumpH (tra): Make an impressive leap.
LongstriderH (tra): Increase your Speed
for an hour.
Magic Fang (tra): Make a creature’s
unarmed attacks magical
temporarily.
MendingH (tra): Repair one non-magical
item.
Negate AromaH (abj): Suppress a
creature’s scent.
Pass without TraceH (abj): Make your
tracks hard to find.
Pest FormH (tra): Turn into a
nonthreatening animal.
Purify Food And Drink (nec): Make
beverages and meals safe.
Shillelagh (tra): Make a club or staff
temporarily magical, and deal more
damage to unnatural creatures.
Shocking GraspH (evo): Zap a creature
with electricity.
Spider Sting (nec): Damage a creature
and afflict it with spider venom.
Summon AnimalH (con): Conjure an
animal to fight on your behalf.
Summon FeyH (con): Conjure a fey to
fight on your behalf.
Summon Plants and FungiH (con):
Conjure a plant or fungus to fight on
your behalf.
VentriloquismH (ill): Throw your voice.
Primal 2nd-Level Spells
Acid ArrowH (evo): Magical arrow deals
acid damage persistently.
Animal FormH (tra): Turn into a
dangerous animal.
Animal Messenger (enc): Send a Tiny
animal to deliver a message.
BarkskinH (abj): Target’s skin is covered
in protective bark.
Continual FlameH (evo): A magical
flame burns indefinitely.
Create FoodH (con): Conjure food that
can feed multiple creatures.
DarknessH (evo): Suppress all light in
an area.
DarkvisionH (div): See in the dark.
Deafness (nec): Make a creature deaf.
Dispel Magic (abj): End a spell or
suppress an item’s magic.
Endure ElementsH (abj): Protect a
creature from severe cold or heat.
Enhance VictualsH (tra): Improve food
or drink and remove poisons.
EnlargeH (tra): A creature grows in size.
Entangle (tra): Plants in an area grow
to entangle and immobilize.
Faerie Fire (evo): Colorful light prevents
creatures from being concealed or
invisible.
Flaming SphereH (evo): A ball of fire
rolls about at your command.
Gentle ReposeH (nec): A corpse doesn’t
decay and can’t become undead.
Glitterdust (evo): Sparkling dust breaks
invisibility and impedes vision.
Humanoid FormH (tra): Take the shape
of a humanoid.
Obscuring Mist (con): Conceal creatures
in a cloud of mist.
Phantom SteedH (con): Conjure a
magical horse.
Remove FearH (enc): Free a creature
from its fright.
Remove ParalysisH (nec): Free a
creature from paralysis.
Resist EnergyH (abj): Protect a creature
from one type of energy damage.
RestorationH (nec): Reduce a condition
or lessen a toxin.
Restore SensesH (nec): Remove a
blinding or deafening effect.
Shape Wood (tra): Reshape unworked
wood as you choose.
ShatterH (evo): Shatter an object with a
high-frequency sonic attack.
ShrinkH (tra): Reduce a willing creature
to Tiny size.
Speak with Animals (div): Communicate
with animals.
Spider ClimbH (tra): Give a creature a
climb Speed.
StatusH (div): Keep track of a willing
creature’s location and well-being.
Summon ElementalH (con): Conjure an
elemental to fight on your behalf.
Tree Shape (tra): Turn into a tree.
Water BreathingH (tra): Allow creatures
to breathe underwater.
Water WalkH (tra): Buoy a creature so
it can walk on water.
WebH (con): Form a web that keeps
creatures from moving.
Primal 3rd-Level Spells
Animal Vision (div): Project your
senses through an animal.
Blindness (nec): Strike a target blind.
Earthbind (tra): Bring a flying creature
to the ground.
Feet to FinsH (tra): Turn a creature’s
feet into fins, enabling it swim but
slowing it on land.
FireballH (evo): An explosion of fire in
an area burns creatures.
Glyph of Warding (abj): Store a spell in
a symbol to make a trap.
Core Rulebook
314
HasteH (tra): Speed up a creature so it
can attack or move more often.
Insect FormH (tra): Turn into a
dangerous giant insect.
Lightning BoltH (evo): Lightning strikes
all creatures in a line.
Meld into Stone (tra): Meld into a block
of stone.
Neutralize Poison (nec): Cure a poison
afflicting a creature.
NondetectionU (abj): Protect a creature
or object from detection.
Remove Disease (nec): Cure a disease
afflicting a creature.
Searing LightH (evo): A ray of burning
light deals extra damage to undead
and counteracts darkness.
SlowH (tra): Make a creature slower,
reducing its actions.
Stinking Cloud (con): Form a cloud that
sickens creatures.
Wall of ThornsH (con): Grow a wall of
brambles.
Wall of Wind (evo): Create a wall
of gusting winds that hinders
movement and ranged attacks.
Primal 4th-Level Spells
Aerial FormH (tra): Turn into a flying
combatant.
Air Walk (tra): Walk on air as though it
were solid ground.
CreationH (con): Make a temporary
object.
Dinosaur FormH (tra): Turn into a
dinosaur.
Fire ShieldH (evo): Flames protect you
from cold and harm those that touch
you.
FlyH (tra): Cause the target creature to
gain a fly Speed.
Freedom of Movement (abj): A creature
overcomes hindrances to its
movement.
Gaseous Form (tra): Turn a willing
creature into a flying cloud.
Hallucinatory TerrainU, H (ill): A natural
environment appears to be another
kind of terrain.
Hydraulic TorrentH (evo): Force
creatures back with a damaging line
of water.
Shape Stone (tra): Reshape a cube of
stone.
Solid Fog (con): Conjure heavy fog that
obscures sight and is hard to move
through.
Speak with Plants (div): Communicate
with plants and plant creatures.
StoneskinH (abj): Harden a creature’s
skin into durable stone.
Vital BeaconH (nec): Radiate vitality
that heals creatures that touch you.
Wall of FireH (evo): Create a blazing
wall burns creatures that pass
through.
Weapon StormH (evo): Multiply a
weapon you hold and attack many
creatures with it.
Primal 5th-Level Spells
BanishmentH (abj): Send a creature
back to its home plane.
CloudkillH (nec): Poison creatures in a
cloud that moves away from you.
Cone of ColdH (evo): Bitter cold
damages creatures in a cone.
Control Water (evo): Raise or lower
water in a large area.
Death Ward (abj): Protect a creature
against negative energy.
Elemental FormH (tra): Turn into an
elemental.
Mariner’s Curse (nec): Infect a creature
with the curse of the rolling sea.
Moon FrenzyH (tra): Give willing
creatures fangs and claws, and send
them into a frenzy.
PasswallU, H (con): Form an earthen
tunnel through a wall.
Plant FormH (tra): Turn into a
dangerous plant creature.
Summon GiantH (con): Conjure a giant
to fight on your behalf.
Tree StrideU, H (con): Teleport from tree
to tree.
Wall of IceH (evo): Sculpt a foot-thick
wall of ice that blocks sight and can
chill creatures.
Wall of StoneH (con): Shape a wall of stone.
Primal 6th-Level Spells
Baleful Polymorph (tra): Transform a
creature into a harmless animal.
Chain LightningH (evo): Lightning jumps
from creature to creature.
Dragon FormH (tra): Turn into a dragon.
Field of LifeH (nec): Create a positive
energy field that heals those within.
Fire SeedsH (evo): Make four explosive
acorns.
Flesh To Stone (tra): Turn a living
creature to a stone statue.
Purple Worm Sting (nec): Damage a
creature and infect it with purple
worm venom.
Stone TellU (div): Speak to spirits within
natural stone.
Stone to Flesh (tra): Turn a creature
turned to stone back to flesh.
Tangling Creepers (con): Entangle
creatures in a burst and concentrate
to lash out with immobilizing vines.
True Seeing (div): See through illusions
and transmutations.
Primal 7th-Level Spells
Eclipse BurstH (nec): A globe of
darkness deals cold damage, hurts
the living, and overcomes light.
Energy AegisH (abj): A creature gains
resistance to acid, cold, electricity,
fire, force, and sonic.
Fiery BodyH (tra): Turn your body into
living flame.
Finger of DeathH (nec): Point at a
creature to deal negative damage
and possibly kill it instantly.
Mask of TerrorH (ill): A creature’s
fearsome illusory appearance
frightens observers.
Plane ShiftU (con): Transport creatures
to another plane of existence.
RegenerateH (nec): Cause a creature to
heal over time, regrow organs, and
reattach body parts.
SunburstH (evo): A globe of sunlight
deals fire damage, hurts undead, and
overcomes darkness.
Unfettered PackH (abj): Let creatures
avoid environmental hindrances.
Volcanic EruptionH (evo): Cause
massive lava sprays that burn
creatures and encase them in rock.
Primal 8th-Level Spells
EarthquakeH (evo): Shake the ground
with a devastating earthquake.
Horrid WiltingH (nec): Pull moisture
from creatures, damaging them.
Moment of Renewal (nec): Give a day’s
recovery in an instant.
Monstrosity FormH (tra): Turn into a
powerful monster.
Polar RayH (evo): Bitter cold damages
and drains a creature.
Punishing Winds (evo): A cyclone
inhibits flight and traps creatures.
Wind Walk (tra): Turn creatures into
swift-moving clouds.
Primal 9th-Level Spells
DisjunctionU (abj): Deactivate or
destroy a magic item.
ImplosionH (evo): Make a creature
collapse in on itself.
MassacreH (nec): Instantly kill multiple
creatures.
Meteor SwarmH (evo): Call down four
blazing meteors that explode.
Nature’s Enmity (enc): Turn animals,
plants, and weather against
creatures of your choice.
Shapechange (tra): Transform into a
form of your choice repeatedly.
Storm of VengeanceH (evo): Create a
massive, dangerous storm.
Primal 10th-Level Spells
Cataclysm (evo): Call an instant,
damaging cataclysm.
Nature Incarnate (tra): Turn into a
massive avatar of nature.
Primal Herd (tra): Transform willing
creatures into mammoths.
Primal Phenomenon (div): Request for
nature to duplicate primal spells.
RemakeU (con): Recreate a destroyed
object.
Revival (nec): Heal creatures in an
area and return the dead to life
temporarily.
315
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Spell Descriptions
ABYSSAL PLAGUE SPELL 5
ATTACK CHAOTIC DISEASE EVIL NECROMANCY
Traditions divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Fortitude
Your touch afflicts the target with Abyssal plague, which
siphons fragments of their soul away to empower the Abyss.
The effect is based on the target’s Fortitude save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target takes 2 evil damage per spell level, and
takes a –2 status penalty to saves against Abyssal plague for
1 day or until the target contracts it, whichever comes first.
Failure The target is afflicted with Abyssal plague at stage 1.
Critical Failure The target is afflicted with Abyssal plague at stage 2.
Abyssal Plague (disease); Level 9. The target can’t recover
from the drained condition from Abyssal plague until the
disease is cured. Stage 1 drained 1 (1 day); Stage 2 drained
increases by 2 (1 day).
ACID ARROW SPELL 2
ACID ATTACK EVOCATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Targets 1 creature or object
You conjure an arrow of acid that continues corroding the
target after it hits. Make a spell attack against the target.
On a hit, you deal 3d8 acid damage plus 1d6 persistent acid
damage. On a critical hit, double the initial damage, but not the
persistent damage.
Heightened (+2) The initial damage increases by 2d8, and the
persistent acid damage increases by 1d6.
ACID SPLASH CANTRIP 1
ACID ATTACK CANTRIP EVOCATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature or object
You splash a glob of acid that splatters creatures and objects
alike. Make a spell attack. If you hit, you deal 1d6 acid damage
plus 1 splash acid damage. On a critical success, the target also
takes 1 persistent acid damage.
Heightened (3rd) The initial damage increases to 1d6 + your
spellcasting ability modifier, and the persistent damage
increases to 2.
Heightened (5th) The initial damage increases to 2d6 + your
spellcasting ability modifier, the persistent damage increases
to 3, and the splash damage increases to 2.
Heightened (7th) The initial damage increases to 3d6 + your
spellcasting ability modifier, the persistent damage increases
to 4, and the splash damage increases to 3.
Heightened (9th) The initial damage increases to 4d6 + your
spellcasting ability modifier, the persistent damage increases
to 5, and the splash damage increases to 4.
AERIAL FORM SPELL 4
POLYMORPH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
You harness your mastery of primal forces to reshape your
body into a Medium flying animal battle form. When you cast
this spell, choose bat, bird, pterosaur, or wasp. You can decide
the specific type of animal (such as an owl or eagle for bird), but
this has no effect on the form’s Size or statistics. While in this
form, you gain the animal trait. You can Dismiss the spell.
You gain the following statistics and abilities regardless of
which battle form you choose:
• AC = 18 + your level. Ignore your armor’s check penalty
and Speed reduction.
• 5 temporary Hit Points.
• Low-light vision.
• One or more unarmed melee attacks specific to the
battle form you choose, which are the only attacks you
can use. You’re trained with them. Your attack modifier
is +16, and your damage bonus is +5. These attacks are
Dexterity based (for the purpose of the clumsy condition,
for example). If your attack modifier for Dexterity-based
unarmed attacks is higher, you can use it instead.
• Acrobatics modifier of +16, unless your own modifier
is higher.
You also gain specific abilities based on the form you choose:
• Bat Speed 20 feet, fly Speed 30 feet; precise echolocation
40 feet; Melee [one-action]fangs, Damage 2d8 piercing; Melee [one-action]
wing (agile), Damage 2d6 bludgeoning.
• Bird Speed 10 feet, fly Speed 50 feet; Melee [one-action] beak,
Damage 2d8 piercing; Melee [one-action] talon (agile), Damage
1d10 slashing.
• Pterosaur Speed 10 feet, fly Speed 40 feet; imprecise
scent 30 feet; Melee [one-action] beak, Damage 3d6 piercing.
• Wasp Speed 20 feet, fly Speed 40 feet; Melee [one-action]
stinger, Damage 1d8 piercing plus 1d6 persistent poison.
Heightened (5th) Your battle form is Large and your fly
Speed gains a +10-foot status bonus. You must have enough
space to expand into or the spell is lost. You instead gain 10
temporary HP, attack modifier +18, damage bonus +8, and
Acrobatics +20.
Heightened (6th) Your battle form is Huge, your fly Speed
gains a +15-foot status bonus, and your attacks have 10-foot
reach. You must have enough space to expand into or the spell
is lost. You instead gain AC = 21 + your level, 15 temporary
HP, attack modifier +21, damage bonus +4 and double damage
dice (including persistent damage), and Acrobatics +23.
AIR BUBBLE SPELL 1
AIR CONJURATION
Traditions arcane, divine, primal
Cast [reaction] verbal; Trigger A creature within range enters an
environment where it can’t breathe.
Range 60 feet; Targets the triggering creature
Duration 1 minute
Core Rulebook
316
A bubble of pure air appears around the target’s head, allowing
it to breathe normally. The effect ends as soon as the target
returns to an environment where it can breathe normally.
AIR WALK SPELL 4
AIR TRANSMUTATION
Traditions divine, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Duration 5 minutes
The target can walk on air as if it were solid ground. It can ascend
and descend in this way at a maximum of a 45-degree angle.
ALARM SPELL 1
ABJURATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult, primal
Cast 10 minutes (material, somatic, verbal); Requirements 3
gp silver bell focus
Range touch; Area 20-foot burst
Duration 8 hours
You ward an area to alert you when creatures enter without your
permission. When you cast alarm, select a password. Whenever
a Small or larger corporeal creature enters the spell’s area without
speaking the password, alarm sends your choice of a mental
alert (in which case the spell gains the mental trait) or an audible
alarm with the sound and volume of a hand bell (in which case
the spell gains the auditory trait). Either option automatically
awakens you, and the bell allows each creature in the area to
attempt a DC 15 Perception check to wake up. A creature aware
of the alarm must succeed at a Stealth check against the spell’s
DC or trigger the spell when moving into the area.
Heightened (3rd) You can specify criteria for which creatures
sound the alarm spell—for instance, orcs or masked people.
ALTER REALITY SPELL 10
DIVINATION
Traditions occult
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
You use your occult lore and the power of your mind to manipulate
the spiritual multiverse, resulting in any of the following effects:
• Duplicate any occult spell of 9th level or lower.
• Duplicate any non-occult spell of 7th level or lower.
• Produce any effect whose power is equivalent to any
occult spell 9th level or lower, or non-occult spell 7th
level or lower.
• Reverse certain effects that refer to the wish spell
At the GM’s discretion, you can try to produce greater effects,
but this is dangerous and the spell may have only a partial effect.
ANATHEMATIC REPRISAL SPELL 4
ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Traditions divine
Cast [reaction] somatic, verbal; Trigger A creature performs an act
anathema to your deity.
Range 30 feet; Targets the triggering creature
Saving Throw Will
You punish a creature that transgresses against your deity,
drawing upon the anguish you feel upon seeing one of your
deity’s anathema committed.
You can cast this spell only when a creature actively commits
a unique act of anathema. For example, if creating undead
were anathema to your deity, you could use anathematic
reprisal on a necromancer who had just created undead in
front of you, but not on an undead creature just for existing.
You deal 4d6 mental damage to the target, but a basic Will
save can reduce this damage. If it fails, it is also stupefied 1 for
1 round. The creature is then temporarily immune for 1 minute.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d6.
ANIMAL FORM SPELL 2
POLYMORPH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
You call upon primal energy to transform yourself into a Medium
animal battle form. When you first cast this spell, choose ape,
bear, bull, canine, cat, deer, frog, shark, or snake. You can decide
the specific type of animal (such as lion or snow leopard for cat),
but this has no effect on the form’s Size or statistics. While in
this form, you gain the animal trait. You can Dismiss the spell.
You gain the following statistics and abilities regardless of
which battle form you choose:
• AC = 16 + your level. Ignore your armor’s check penalty
and Speed reduction.
• 5 temporary Hit Points.
• Low-light vision and imprecise scent 30 feet.
• One or more unarmed melee attacks specific to the
battle form you choose, which are the only attacks you
can use. You’re trained with them. Your attack modifier
is +9, and your damage bonus is +1. These attacks
are Strength based (for the purpose of the enfeebled
condition, for example). If your unarmed attack bonus
is higher, you can use it instead.
• Athletics modifier of +9, unless your own modifier
is higher.
You also gain specific abilities based on the type of animal
you choose:
• Ape Speed 25 feet, climb Speed 20 feet; Melee [one-action] fist,
Damage 2d6 bludgeoning.
• Bear Speed 30 feet; Melee [one-action]jaws, Damage 2d8 piercing;
Melee [one-action]claw (agile), Damage 1d8 slashing.
• Bull Speed 30 feet; Melee[one-action]horn, Damage 2d8 piercing.
• Canine Speed 40 feet; Melee [one-action] jaws, Damage 2d8
piercing.
• Cat Speed 40 feet; Melee [one-action] jaws, Damage 2d6 piercing;
Melee [one-action]claw (agile), Damage 1d10 slashing.
• Deer Speed 50 feet; Melee[one-action]antler, Damage 2d6 piercing.
• Frog Speed 25 feet, swim Speed 25 feet; Melee [one-action] jaws,
Damage 2d6 bludgeoning; Melee [one-action] tongue (reach 15
feet), Damage 2d4 bludgeoning.
• Shark swim Speed 35 feet; Melee [one-action] jaws, Damage
2d8 piercing; breathe underwater but not in air.
317
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
• Snake Speed 20 feet, climb Speed 20 feet, swim
Speed 20 feet; Melee [one-action] fangs, Damage 2d4 piercing
plus 1d6 poison.
Heightened (3rd) You instead gain 10 temporary HP, AC =
17 + your level, attack modifier +14, damage bonus +5, and
Athletics +14.
Heightened (4th) Your battle form is Large and your attacks have
10-foot reach. You must have enough space to expand into or the
spell is lost. You instead gain 15 temporary HP, AC = 18 + your
level, attack modifier +16, damage bonus +9, and Athletics +16.
Heightened (5th) Your battle form is Huge and your attacks
have 15-foot reach. You must have enough space to expand
into or the spell is lost. You instead gain 20 temporary HP,
AC = 18 + your level, attack modifier +18, damage bonus +7
and double the number of damage dice, and Athletics +20.
ANIMAL MESSENGER SPELL 2
ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Traditions primal
Cast 1 minute (material, somatic, verbal)
Range 120 feet
Duration until delivered
You offer a gift of food, and an ordinary Tiny wild animal
within range approaches to eat it. You imprint the image,
direction, and distance of an obvious place or landmark well
known to you within the animal. Optionally, you can attach
a small object or note up to light Bulk to it. The animal does
its best to reach the destination; if it makes it there, it waits
nearby until the duration expires, allowing other nonhostile
creatures to approach it and remove the attached object.
If there are no Tiny wild animals in range, the spell is lost.
ANIMAL VISION SPELL 3
DIVINATION MENTAL
Traditions primal
Cast 1 minute (material, somatic, verbal)
Range 120 feet; Targets 1 animal
Duration 1 hour
You tap into the target’s senses, allowing you to see, hear, and
otherwise sense whatever it senses for the spell’s duration. If
the target wishes to prevent you from doing so, it can attempt
a Will save, negating the spell on a success, but most animals
don’t bother to do so. While tapping into the target’s senses,
you can’t use your own body’s senses, but you can change
back and forth from your body’s senses to the target’s senses
using a single action, which has the concentrate trait.
ANT HAUL SPELL 1
TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Duration 8 hours
You reinforce the target’s musculoskeletal system to bear more
weight. The target can carry 3 more Bulk than normal before
becoming encumbered and up to a maximum of 6 more Bulk.
ANTIMAGIC FIELD SPELL 8
RARE ABJURATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Area 10-foot emanation
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You repel all magic from the target area, preventing spells
and other magic from functioning. Spells can’t penetrate the
area, magic items cease to function within it, and no one
inside can cast spells or use magic abilities. Likewise, spells—
such as dispel magic—can’t affect the field itself unless they
are of a higher level. Magic effects resume the moment they
pass outside the field. For example, a ray fired from one side
of the field could target a creature on the other side (as long
as caster and target are both outside the field). A summoned
creature winks out of existence but reappears if the field
moves or ends. Invested magic items cease to function, but
they remain invested and resume functioning when they exit
the field; the ability boost from an apex item isn’t suppressed
within the field. Spells of a higher level than the antimagic
field overcome its effects, and can even be cast by a creature
within the field.
The field disrupts only magic, so a +3 longsword still
functions as a longsword. Magically created creatures (such
as golems) function normally within an antimagic field.
AUGURY SPELL 2
DIVINATION PREDICTION
Traditions divine, occult
Cast 10 minutes (material, somatic, verbal)
You gain a vague glimpse of the future. During the casting of
this spell, ask about the results of a particular course of action.
The spell can predict results up to 30 minutes into the future
and reveals the GM’s best guess among the following outcomes:
• Weal The results will be good.
• Woe The results will be bad.
• Weal and Woe The results will be a mix of good and bad.
• Nothing There won’t be particularly good or bad results.
The GM rolls a secret DC 6 flat check. On a failure, the result
is always “nothing.” This makes it impossible to tell whether a
“nothing” result is accurate. If anyone asks about the same topic
as the first casting of augury during an additional casting, the GM
uses the secret roll result from the first casting. If circumstances
change, though, it’s possible to get a different result.
AVATAR SPELL 10
POLYMORPH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions divine
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
You transform into an avatar of your deity, assuming a Huge
battle form. You must have space to expand or the spell is lost.
You have hands in this battle form and can take manipulate
actions. You can Dismiss this spell.
You gain the following statistics and abilities regardless of
which deity’s battle form you assume:
Core Rulebook
318
• AC = 25 + your level. Ignore your armor’s check penalty
and Speed reduction.
• 30 temporary Hit Points.
• Darkvision.
• One or more attacks specific to your deity’s battle
form, which are the only attacks you can use. You’re
trained with them. Your attack modifier is +33,
and you use the listed damage. Melee attacks are
Strength based (for the purposes of the enfeebled
condition, for example) unless they have the finesse
trait, and all ranged attacks are Dexterity based.
Attacks that deal positive or negative damage don’t
heal creatures.
• Athletics modifier of +35, unless your own is higher.
You also gain the specific abilities listed for your deity below:
• Abadar Speed 50 feet, burrow Speed 30 feet, immune
to immobilized; Ranged [one-action] crossbow (range increment
120 feet, reload 1), Damage 6d10+3 piercing.
• Asmodeus Speed 70 feet, air walk; Melee [one-action] mace
(reach 15 feet), Damage 6d10+6 bludgeoning; Ranged
[one-action] hellfire (range 120 feet), Damage 6d6+3 fire.
• Calistria Speed 30 feet, fly Speed 70 feet; Melee
[one‑action] whip (disarm, finesse, nonlethal, reach 20 feet),
Damage 6d4+6 slashing; Ranged [one-action] savored sting
(range 60 feet), Damage 6d6+3 poison.
• Cayden Cailean Speed 70 feet, air walk, ignore difficult
terrain and greater difficult terrain; Melee [one-action] rapier
(deadly, reach 15 feet), Damage 6d6+6 piercing; Ranged
[one-action] ale splash (range 120 feet), Damage 6d6+3 poison.
• Desna Speed 30 feet, fly Speed 70 feet; Melee [one-action]
starknife (agile, deadly, finesse, reach 15 feet, silver,
thrown 60 feet), Damage 6d4+6 piercing; Ranged [one-action]
moonbeam (range 120 feet, silver), Damage 6d6+3 fire.
• Erastil Speed 70 feet, air walk, ignore difficult terrain
and greater difficult terrain; Ranged [one-action]longbow (deadly
d8, range increment 150 feet), Damage 6d8+3 piercing.
• Gorum Speed 70 feet, immune to immobilized; Melee
[one-action] greatsword (versatile P, reach 15 feet), Damage
6d12+6 slashing.
• Gozreh no land Speed, fly Speed 70 feet, swim Speed
70 feet; ignore difficult terrain and greater difficult
terrain; Melee [one-action] waves (bull rush, reach 15 feet,
thrown 20 feet), Damage 6d8+6 bludgeoning; Ranged
[one-action] wind (versatile electricity, range 120 feet), Damage
6d6+3 bludgeoning.
• Iomedae Speed 70 feet, air walk; shield (15 Hardness,
can’t be damaged); Melee [one-action] longsword (versatile P,
reach 15 feet), Damage 6d8+6 slashing.
• Irori Speed 80 feet, air walk; Melee [one-action] unfettered
strike (agile, versatile P or S, finesse, reach 15 feet),
Damage 6d8+6 bludgeoning; Ranged [one-action] wind strike
(range 60 feet), Damage 6d4+6 bludgeoning.
• Lamashtu Speed 30 feet, fly Speed 70 feet; Melee
[one‑action] falchion (forceful, reach 15 feet), Damage
319
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
6d10+6 slashing; Ranged [one-action] waters of Lamashtu
(range 120 feet), Damage 6d6+3 poison.
• Nethys Speed 70 feet, air walk; Ranged [one-action] raw magic
(range 120 feet; versatile cold, electricity, or fire),
Damage 6d6 force.
• Norgorber Speed 70 feet, air walk, ignore difficult
terrain and greater difficult terrain; Melee [one-action]
shortsword (agile, finesse, versatile S, reach 15 feet),
Damage 6d6+6 piercing; Ranged [one-action] blackfinger toss
(range 120 feet), Damage 6d6+3 poison.
• Pharasma Speed 70 feet, air walk; Melee [one-action] dagger
(agile, finesse, reach 15 feet, thrown 40 feet), Damage
6d6+6 slashing; Ranged [one-action] spiral blast (range 120
feet, damages only undead), Damage 6d8+3 positive.
• Rovagug Speed 50 feet, burrow Speed 30 feet, immune
to immobilized; Melee [one-action] jaws (reach 15 feet), Damage
6d12+6 piercing; Melee [one-action] leg (agile, versatile P, reach
15 feet), Damage 6d8+6 bludgeoning.
• Sarenrae Speed 30 feet, fly Speed 70 feet; Melee [one-action]
scimitar (forceful, nonlethal, reach 15 feet), Damage
6d6+6 slashing; Ranged [one-action] everflame (nonlethal,
range 120 feet), Damage 6d6+3 fire.
• Shelyn Speed 70 feet, air walk, ignore difficult terrain
and greater difficult terrain; Melee [one-action] glaive (deadly
d8, nonlethal, reach 20 feet), Damage 6d8+6 slashing;
Ranged [one-action] melody of inner beauty, (nonlethal, range
120 feet), Damage 6d6+3 sonic.
• Torag Speed 50 feet, burrow Speed 30 feet, immune to
immobilized; shield (15 Hardness, can’t be damaged);
Melee [one-action] warhammer (bull rush, reach 15 feet),
Damage 6d8+6 bludgeoning.
• Urgathoa Speed 70 feet, air walk; Melee[one-action]scythe (deadly
d10, trip, reach 15 feet), Damage 6d10+6 slashing; Ranged
[one-action]pallid plague (range 120 feet), Damage 6d6+3 negative.
• Zon-Kuthon Speed 70 feet, air walk, ignore difficult
terrain and greater difficult terrain; Melee [one-action] spiked
chain (disarm, trip, reach 15 feet), Damage 6d8+6
slashing; Ranged [one-action] midnight pain (mental, nonlethal,
range 120 feet), Damage 6d6+3 mental.
BALEFUL POLYMORPH SPELL 6
INCAPACITATION POLYMORPH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Fortitude; Duration varies
You transform the target creature into a harmless animal
appropriate to the area, with effects based on its Fortitude save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target’s body gains minor features of the harmless
animal. Its insides churn as they partially transform, causing
it to be sickened 1. When it recovers from the sickened
condition, its features revert to normal.
Failure The target transforms for 1 minute but keeps its mind. If
it spends all its actions on its turn concentrating on its original
form, it can attempt a Will save to end the effect immediately.
Critical Failure The target is transformed into the chosen
harmless animal, body and mind, for an unlimited duration.
BANE SPELL 1
ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Traditions divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 5-foot emanation; Targets enemies in the area
Saving Throw Will; Duration 1 minute
You fill the minds of your enemies with doubt. Targets that
fail their Will saves take a –1 status penalty to attack rolls as
long as they are in the area. Once per turn, starting the turn
after you cast bane, you can use a single action, which has
the concentrate trait, to increase the emanation’s radius by 5
feet and force enemies in the area that weren’t yet affected
to attempt another saving throw. Bane can counteract bless.
BANISHMENT SPELL 5
ABJURATION INCAPACITATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature that isn’t on its home plane
Saving Throw Will
You send the target back to its home plane. The target must
attempt a Will save. You can spend an extra action while Casting
this Spell and add a material component to give the creature a
–2 circumstance penalty to its save. The component must be a
specially gathered object that is anathema to the creature, and
not from a spell component pouch. This spell fails if you aren’t
on your home plane when you cast it.
Critical Success The target resists being banished and you are
stunned 1.
Success The target resists being banished.
Failure The target is banished.
Critical Failure The target is banished and can’t return by any
means to the plane it’s banished from for 1 week.
Heightened (9th) You can target up to 10 creatures. The extra
material component affects targets to which it is anathema.
BARKSKIN SPELL 2
ABJURATION PLANT
Traditions primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 willing creature
Duration 10 minutes
The target’s skin becomes covered in bark. The target gains
resistance 2 to bludgeoning and piercing damage and weakness
3 to fire. After the target takes fire damage, it can Dismiss the
spell as a free action triggered by taking the damage; doing so
doesn’t reduce the fire damage the target was dealt.
Heightened (+2) The resistances increase by 2, and the
weakness increases by 3.
BIND SOUL SPELL 9
UNCOMMON EVIL NECROMANCY
Traditions divine, occult
Core Rulebook
320
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal; Requirements black sapphire with a
gp value of at least the target’s level × 100
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature that died within the
last minute
Duration unlimited
You wrench the target’s soul away before it can pass on to the
afterlife and imprison it in a black sapphire.
While the soul is in the gem, the target can’t be returned to
life through any means, even powerful magic such as wish. If
the gem is destroyed or bind soul is counteracted on the gem,
the soul is freed. The gem has AC 16 and Hardness 10. A gem
can’t hold more than one soul, and any attempt wastes the spell.
BIND UNDEAD SPELL 3
NECROMANCY
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 mindless undead creature with a level
no greater than bind undead’s spell level
Duration 1 day
With a word of necromantic power, you seize control of the
target. It gains the minion trait. If you or an ally uses any
hostile actions against the target, the spell ends.
BLACK TENTACLES SPELL 5
CONJURATION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Area 20-foot burst adjacent to a flat surface
Duration 1 minute
Oily black tentacles rise up and attempt to Grapple each creature
in the area. Make spell attack rolls against the Fortitude DC of
each creature. Any creature you succeed against is grabbed
and takes 3d6 bludgeoning damage. Whenever a creature ends
its turn in the area, the tentacles attempt to grab that creature
if they haven’t already, and they deal 1d6 bludgeoning damage
to any creature already grabbed.
The tentacles’ Escape DC is equal to your spell DC. A creature
can attack a tentacle in an attempt to release its grip. Its AC
is equal to your spell DC, and it is destroyed if it takes 12 or
more damage. Even if destroyed, additional tentacles continue
to grow in the area until the duration ends. You can Dismiss
the spell.
BLADE BARRIER SPELL 6
EVOCATION FORCE
Traditions divine
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet
Duration 1 minute
Blades of force form a churning wall. The wall is a straight
line 20 feet high, 120 feet long, and 2 inches thick, and it
provides cover. The wall deals 7d8 force damage to each
creature that’s in the wall’s space when it is created, that
attempts to pass through the wall, or that ends its turn
inside the wall. A basic Reflex save reduces the damage.
A  creature that succeeds at this save when the wall is
created is pushed to the nearest space on the side of its
choice. Creatures trying to move through the wall fail to
do so if they critically fail the save, ending their movement
adjacent to the wall.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d8.
BLESS SPELL 1
ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Traditions divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 5-foot emanation; Targets you and allies in the area
Duration 1 minute
Blessings from beyond help your companions strike true.
You and your allies in the area gain a +1 status bonus to
attack rolls. Once per turn, starting the turn after you cast
bless, you can use a single action, which has the concentrate
trait, to increase the emanation’s radius by 5 feet. Bless can
counteract bane.
BLINDNESS SPELL 3
INCAPACITATION NECROMANCY
Traditions arcane, divine, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Fortitude
You blind the target. The effect is determined by the target’s
Fortitude save. The target then becomes temporarily immune
for 1 minute.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target is blinded until its next turn begins.
Failure The target is blinded for 1 minute.
Critical Failure The target is blinded permanently.
BLINK SPELL 4
CONJURATION TELEPORTATION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
You blink quickly between the Material Plane and the Ethereal
Plane. You gain resistance 5 to all damage (except force). You
can Sustain the Spell to vanish and reappear 10 feet away in
a random direction determined by the GM; the movement
doesn’t trigger reactions. At the end of your turn, you vanish
and reappear as above.
Heightened (+2) The resistance increases by 3.
BLUR SPELL 2
ILLUSION VISUAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Duration 1 minute
The target’s form appears blurry. It becomes concealed. As the
nature of this effect still leaves the target’s location obvious,
the target can’t use this concealment to Hide or Sneak.
321
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
BREATH OF LIFE SPELL 5
HEALING NECROMANCY POSITIVE
Traditions divine
Cast [reaction] verbal; Trigger A living creature within range would die.
Range 60 feet; Targets the triggering creature
Your blessing revives a creature at the moment of its death.
You prevent the target from dying and restore Hit Points to the
target equal to 4d8 plus your spellcasting ability modifier. You
can’t use breath of life if the triggering effect was disintegrate
or a death effect.
BURNING HANDS SPELL 1
EVOCATION FIRE
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 15-foot cone
Saving Throw basic Reflex
Gouts of flame rush from your hands. You deal 2d6 fire
damage to creatures in the area.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d6.
CALM EMOTIONS SPELL 2
EMOTION ENCHANTMENT INCAPACITATION MENTAL
Traditions divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Area 10-foot burst
Saving Throw Will; Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You forcibly calm creatures in the area, soothing them into a
nonviolent state; each creature must attempt a Will save.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success Calming urges impose a –1 status penalty to the
creature’s attack rolls.
Failure Any emotion effects that would affect the creature
are suppressed and the creature can’t use hostile actions.
If the target is subject to hostility from any other creature,
it ceases to be affected by calm emotions.
Critical Failure As failure, but hostility doesn’t end the effect.
CATACLYSM SPELL 10
ACID AIR COLD EARTH
ELECTRICITY EVOCATION FIRE WATER
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 1,000 feet; Area 60-foot burst
Saving Throw basic Reflex
You call upon the unimaginable power of world-ending
cataclysms, ripping a small piece of each cataclysm and
combining them together into one horrifically powerful attack.
The following effects come down upon all creatures in the
area. Treat the resistances of creatures in the area as if they
were 10 lower for the purpose of determining the cataclysm’s
damage. Each creature attempts one basic Reflex save that
applies to all six types of damage.
• Flesh-dissolving acid rain deals 3d10 acid damage.
• A roaring earthquake shakes and bludgeons creatures
on the ground, dealing 3d10 bludgeoning damage.
• A blast of freezing wind deals 3d10 cold damage.
• Incredible lightning lashes the area, dealing 3d10
electricity damage.
• Beating winds churn across the sky, dealing 3d10
bludgeoning damage to creatures flying in the area.
• An instant tsunami sweeps over creatures in the area,
dealing 3d10 bludgeoning damage with the water trait
(doubled for creatures swimming in the area).
• A massive wildfire burns in a sudden inferno, dealing
3d10 fire damage.
CHAIN LIGHTNING SPELL 6
ELECTRICITY EVOCATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 500 feet; Targets 1 creature, plus any number of
additional creatures
Saving Throw Reflex
You discharge a powerful bolt of lightning at the target, dealing
8d12 electricity damage. The target must attempt a basic
Reflex save. The electricity arcs to another creature within 30
feet of the first target, jumps to another creature within 30
feet of that target, and so on. You can end the chain at any
point. You can’t target the same creature more than once, and
you must have line of effect to all targets. Roll the damage
only once, and apply it to each target (halving or doubling as
appropriate for its saving throw outcome). The chain ends if
any one of the targets critically succeeds at its save.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d12.
CHARM SPELL 1
EMOTION ENCHANTMENT INCAPACITATION MENTAL
Traditions arcane, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration 1 hour
To the target, your words are honey and your visage seems
bathed in a dreamy haze. It must attempt a Will save, with a +4
circumstance bonus if you or your allies recently threatened it
or used hostile actions against it.
You can Dismiss the spell. If you use hostile actions against
the target, the spell ends. When the spell ends, the target
doesn’t necessarily realize it was charmed unless its friendship
with you or the actions you convinced it to take clash with
its expectations, meaning you could potentially convince the
target to continue being your friend via mundane means.
Critical Success The target is unaffected and aware you tried
to charm it.
Success The target is unaffected but thinks your spell was
something harmless instead of charm, unless it identifies
the spell (usually with Identify Magic).
Failure The target’s attitude becomes friendly toward you. If it
was friendly, it becomes helpful. It can’t use hostile actions
against you.
Critical Failure The target’s attitude becomes helpful toward
you, and it can’t use hostile actions against you.
Core Rulebook
322
Heightened (4th) The duration lasts until the next time you
make your daily preparations.
Heightened (8th) The duration lasts until the next time
you make your daily preparations, and you can target up
to 10 creatures.
CHILL TOUCH CANTRIP 1
ATTACK CANTRIP NECROMANCY NEGATIVE
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 living or undead creature
Saving Throw Fortitude
Siphoning negative energy into yourself, your hand radiates a
pale darkness. Your touch weakens the living and disorients
undead, possibly even causing them to flee. The effect depends
on whether the target is living or undead.
• Living Creature The spell deals negative damage equal
to 1d4 plus your spellcasting modifier. The target
attempts a basic Fortitude save, but is also enfeebled 1
for 1 round on a critical failure.
• Undead Creature The target is flat-footed for 1 round
on a failed Fortitude save. On a critical failure, the
target is also fleeing for 1 round unless it succeeds at a
Will save.
Heightened (+1) The negative damage to living creatures
increases by 1d4.
CHILLING DARKNESS SPELL 3
ATTACK COLD DARKNESS EVOCATION EVIL
Traditions divine
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Targets 1 creature
You shoot an utterly cold ray of darkness tinged with unholy
energy. Make a ranged spell attack against the target. You
deal 5d6 cold damage, plus 5d6 evil damage if the target is
a celestial.
If the ray passes through an area of magical light or targets
a creature affected by magical light, chilling darkness attempts
to counteract the light. If you need to determine whether
the ray passes through an area of light, draw a line between
yourself and the spell’s target.
Critical Success The target takes double damage.
Success The target takes full damage.
Heightened (+1) The cold damage increases by 2d6, and the
evil damage against celestials increases by 2d6.
CHROMATIC WALL SPELL 5
ABJURATION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet
Duration 10 minutes
You create an opaque wall of light in a single vibrant color.
The wall is straight and vertical, stretching 60 feet long and
30 feet high. If the wall would pass through a creature, the
spell is lost. The wall sheds bright light for 20 feet on each
side, and dim light for the next 20 feet. You can ignore the
wall’s effects.
Roll 1d4 to determine the color of the wall. Each color has a
particular effect on items, effects, or creatures that attempt to
pass through. Chromatic wall can’t be counteracted normally;
rather, each color is automatically counteracted when targeted
by a specific spell, even if that spell’s level is lower than that
of chromatic wall.
1. Red The wall destroys ranged weapon ammunition
(such as arrows and crossbow bolts) that would pass
through, and it deals 20 fire damage to anyone
passing through, with a basic Reflex save. Cone of
cold can counteract a red chromatic wall.
2. Orange The wall destroys thrown weapons that would
pass through, and it deals 25 acid damage to anyone
passing through, with a basic Reflex save. Gust of wind
can counteract an orange chromatic wall.
3. Yellow The wall stops acid, cold, electricity, fire, force,
negative, positive, and sonic effects from passing
through, and it deals 30 electricity damage to anyone
passing through, with a basic Reflex save. Disintegrate
can counteract a yellow chromatic wall.
4. Green The wall stops toxins, gases, and breath
weapons from passing through. It deals 10 poison
damage to anyone passing through and makes
them enfeebled 1 for 1 minute. A basic Fortitude
save reduces the damage and negates the enfeebled
condition on a success. Passwall can counteract a
green chromatic wall.
MAGIC AND MORALITY
While magic allows you to perform wondrous acts in
the game, it can be used for terrible purposes. While
some spells are obviously vile or have the evil trait and a
direct connection to the profane, other spells can be used
for good or ill. Using magic does not free you from the
morality of the outcome.
Nowhere is this more true than when it comes to
enchantment spells, especially those used to compel a
character to do something. These spells can remove the
power of choice from a character and can very easily
be used in ways that are evil. Dominating an ogre and
forcing him to abandon his guard post is not necessarily
evil, but using that same spell to force a merchant to give
you all of his wares certainly is. Using a spell for an evil
purpose can cause a player character’s alignment to shift
to evil, with the ultimate judgment of whether a player is
using a spell for an evil purpose left up to the GM.
Regardless of in-game effects, all players should take
care when using such spells. These effects can negatively
affect people at the table, as they might create situations
that echo truly awful experiences players might have
had, creating uncomfortable or hostile environments.
Players and GMs should work to prevent these situations
so everyone can focus on having fun at the table.
323
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Heightened (7th) The spell’s duration increases to 1 hour. Roll
1d8 to determine the wall’s color; the results for 5–8 are below.
A red, orange, yellow, or green wall deals an extra 10 damage.
5. Blue The wall stops auditory, petrification, and visual
effects from passing through, and creatures passing
through are subject to the effects of flesh to stone.
Magic missile can counteract a blue chromatic wall.
6. Indigo The wall stops divination and mental effects
from passing through, and those passing through are
subject to the effects of warp mind. Searing light can
counteract an indigo chromatic wall.
7. Violet The wall prevents spells from targeting the other
side (area effects still cross as normal). Creatures passing
through must succeed at a Will save or they are slowed
1 for 1 minute; on a critical failure, the creature is instead
sent to another plane, with the effect of plane shift. Dispel
magic can counteract a violet chromatic wall.
8. Reroll, and creatures that pass through the wall take a
–2 circumstance penalty to their saves.
CIRCLE OF PROTECTION SPELL 3
UNCOMMON ABJURATION
Traditions divine, occult
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range touch; Area 10-foot emanation centered on the touched
creature
Duration 1 minute
You ward a creature and those nearby against a specified
alignment. Choose chaotic, evil, good, or lawful; this spell gains
the opposing trait. Creatures in the area gain a +1 status bonus
to AC against attacks by creatures of the chosen alignment
and to saves against effects from such creatures. This bonus
increases to +3 against effects from such creatures that directly
control the target and attacks made by summoned creatures
of the chosen alignment. Summoned creatures of the chosen
alignment can’t willingly enter the area without succeeding at a
Will save; repeated attempts use the first save result.
Heightened (4th) The duration increases to 1 hour.
CLAIRAUDIENCE SPELL 3
DIVINATION SCRYING
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast 1 minute (material, somatic, verbal)
Range 500 feet
Duration 10 minutes
You create an invisible floating ear at a location within range
(even if it’s outside your line of sight or line of effect). It can’t
move, but you can hear through the ear as if using your
normal auditory senses.
CLAIRVOYANCE SPELL 4
DIVINATION SCRYING
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast 1 minute (material, somatic, verbal)
Range 500 feet
Duration 10 minutes
You create an invisible floating eye at a location within range
(even if it’s outside your line of sight or line of effect). The eye
can’t move, but you can see in all directions from that point as
if using your normal visual senses.
CLOAK OF COLORS SPELL 5
ILLUSION VISUAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Duration 1 minute
A cloak of swirling colors shrouds the target. Creatures are
dazzled while adjacent to it, and attacking the target causes
a brilliant flash of light. A creature that hits the target with a
melee attack must attempt a Will save.
Success The attacker is unaffected.
Failure The attacker is blinded for 1 round.
Critical Failure The attacker is stunned for 1 round.
The creature is temporarily immune until the end of its turn;
this effect has the incapacitation trait.
CLOUDKILL SPELL 5
DEATH NECROMANCY POISON
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Area 20-foot burst
Saving Throw basic Fortitude; Duration 1 minute
You conjure a poisonous fog. This functions as obscuring mist
(page 355), except the area moves 10 feet away from you each
round. You deal 6d8 poison damage to each breathing creature
that starts its turn in the spell’s area. You can Dismiss the spell.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d8.
COLLECTIVE TRANSPOSITION SPELL 6
CONJURATION TELEPORTATION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 30-foot emanation; Targets up to 2 creatures
You teleport the targets to new positions within the area. The
creatures must each be able to fit in their new space, and their
positions must be unoccupied, entirely within the area, and in
your line of sight. Unwilling creatures can attempt a Will save.
Critical Success The target can teleport if it wants, but it
chooses the destination within range.
Success The target is unaffected.
Failure You teleport the target and choose its destination.
Heightened (+1) The number of targets increases by 1.
COLOR SPRAY SPELL 1
ILLUSION INCAPACITATION VISUAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 15-foot cone
Saving Throw Will; Duration 1 or more rounds (see below)
Swirling colors affect viewers based on their Will saves.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Core Rulebook
324
Success The creature is dazzled for 1 round.
Failure The creature is stunned 1, blinded for 1 round, and
dazzled for 1 minute.
Critical Failure The creature is stunned for 1 round and blinded
for 1 minute.
COMMAND SPELL 1
AUDITORY ENCHANTMENT LINGUISTIC MENTAL
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration until the end of the target’s next turn
You shout a command that’s hard to ignore. You can command
the target to approach you, run away (as if it had the fleeing
condition), release what it’s holding, drop prone, or stand in
place. It can’t Delay or take any reactions until it has obeyed
your command. The effects depend on the target’s Will save.
Success The creature is unaffected.
Failure For the first action on its next turn, the creature must
use a single action to do as you command.
Critical Failure The target must use all its actions on its next
turn to obey your command.
Heightened (5th) You can target up to 10 creatures.
COMPREHEND LANGUAGE SPELL 2
DIVINATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Duration 1 hour
The target can understand the meaning of a single language
it is hearing or reading when you cast the spell. This doesn’t
let it understand codes, language couched in metaphor, and the
like (subject to GM discretion). If the target can hear multiple
languages and knows that, it can choose which language to
understand; otherwise, choose one of the languages randomly.
Heightened (3rd) The target can also speak the language.
Heightened (4th) You can target up to 10 creatures, and
targets can also speak the language.
CONE OF COLD SPELL 5
COLD EVOCATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 60-foot cone
Saving Throw basic Reflex
Icy cold rushes forth from your hands. You deal 12d6 cold
damage to creatures in the area.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d6.
CONFUSION SPELL 4
EMOTION ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration 1 minute
You befuddle your target with strange impulses, causing it to
act randomly. The effects are determined by the target’s Will
save. You can Dismiss the spell.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
325
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Success The target babbles incoherently and is stunned 1.
Failure The target is confused for 1 minute. It can attempt a
new save at the end of each of its turns to end the confusion.
Critical Failure The target is confused for 1 minute, with no
save to end early.
Heightened (8th) You can target up to 10 creatures.
CONTINGENCY SPELL 7
ABJURATION
Traditions arcane
Cast 10 minutes (material, somatic, verbal)
Duration 24 hours
You prepare a spell that will trigger later. While casting
contingency, you also cast another spell of 4th level or lower
with a casting time of no more than 3 actions. This companion
spell must be one that can affect you. You must make any
decisions for the spell when you cast contingency, such as
choosing a damage type for resist energy. During the casting,
choose a trigger under which the spell will be cast, using the
same restrictions as for the trigger of a Ready action. Once
contingency is cast, you can cause the companion spell to
come into effect as a reaction with that trigger. It affects
only you, even if it would affect more creatures. If you define
complicated conditions, as determined by the GM, the trigger
might fail. If you cast contingency again, the newer casting
supersedes the older.
Heightened (8th) You can choose a spell of 5th level or lower.
Heightened (9th) You can choose a spell of 6th level or lower.
Heightened (10th) You can choose a spell of 7th level or lower.
CONTINUAL FLAME SPELL 2
EVOCATION LIGHT
Traditions arcane, divine, occult, primal
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal; Cost 6 gp of ruby dust
Range touch; Targets 1 object
Duration unlimited
A magical flame springs up from the object, as bright as a torch.
It doesn’t need oxygen, react to water, or generate heat.
Heightened (+1) The cost increases as follows: 16 gp for 3rd
level; 30 gp for 4th, 60 gp for 5th, 120 gp for 6th,; 270 gp for
7th, 540 gp for 8th, 1,350 gp for 9th, and 3,350 gp for 10th.
CONTROL WATER SPELL 5
EVOCATION WATER
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 500 feet; Area 50 feet long by 50 feet wide
By imposing your will upon the water, you can raise or
lower the level of water in the chosen area by 10 feet. Water
creatures in the area are subjected to the effects of slow.
CREATE FOOD SPELL 2
CONJURATION
Traditions arcane, divine, primal
Cast 1 hour (somatic, verbal)
Range 30 feet
You create enough food to feed six Medium creatures for a
day. This food is bland and unappealing, but it is nourishing.
After 1 day, if no one has eaten the food, it decays and
becomes inedible. Most Small creatures eat one-quarter as
much as a Medium creature (one-sixteenth as much for most
Tiny creatures), and most Large creatures eat 10 times as
much (100 times as much for Huge creatures and so on).
Heightened (4th) You can feed 12 Medium creatures.
Heightened (6th) You can feed 50 Medium creatures.
Heightened (8th) You can feed 200 Medium creatures.
CREATE WATER SPELL 1
CONJURATION WATER
Traditions arcane, divine, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 0 feet
As you cup your hands, water begins to flow forth from them.
You create 2 gallons of water. If no one drinks it, it evaporates
after 1 day.
CREATION SPELL 4
CONJURATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast 1 minute (material, somatic, verbal)
Range 0 feet
Duration 1 hour
You conjure a temporary object from eldritch energy. It must
be of vegetable matter (such as wood or paper) and 5 cubic
feet or smaller. It can’t rely on intricate artistry or complex
moving parts, never fulfills a cost or the like, and can’t be made
of precious materials or materials with a rarity of uncommon
or higher. It is obviously temporarily conjured, and thus can’t
be sold or passed off as a genuine item.
Heightened (5th) The item is metal and can include common
minerals, like feldspar or quartz.
CRISIS OF FAITH SPELL 3
ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Traditions divine
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will
You assault the target’s faith, riddling the creature with
doubt and mental turmoil that deal 6d6 mental damage, or
6d8 mental damage if it can cast divine spells. The effects are
determined by its Will save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target takes half damage.
Failure The target takes full damage; if the target can cast
divine spells, it’s stupefied 1 for 1 round.
Critical Failure The target takes double damage, is stupefied 1
for 1 round, and can’t cast divine spells for 1 round.
To many deities, casting this spell on a follower of your own
deity without significant cause is anathema.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d6 (or by 2d8 if
the target is a divine spellcaster).
Core Rulebook
326
CRUSADE SPELL 9
UNCOMMON ENCHANTMENT LINGUISTIC MENTAL
Traditions divine
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 60 feet; Targets up to 4 creatures
Duration 10 minutes
You issue a divine mandate to the targets. you pronounce
a cause. It can be to attain an item, claim a patch of land,
slay a creature, war with a group, or be entirely peaceful.
Your cause can’t force the targets to harm one another or
themselves. The targets become completely dedicated to
that cause, depending on their levels. They choose their
own actions, but they favor direct action over inaction or
indirect action.
• 13th or Lower The target is so dedicated to the cause
that it pursues the cause to the death (unless you
say otherwise).
• 14th The target is dedicated to the cause, but the spell
ends for the target if it’s reduced to half its maximum
Hit Points or fewer. • 15th As 14th, plus the target
can attempt a Will save at the end of each of its turns
to end the spell for itself.
The spell ends for all creatures if you or one of your allies
uses a hostile action against a target, or when the cause is
completed. The GM might determine this spell has alignment
traits befitting the cause.
Heightened (10th) The level for each category increases by 2.
CRUSHING DESPAIR SPELL 5
EMOTION ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 30-foot cone
Saving Throw Will; Duration 1 or more rounds
You inflict despair on creatures in the area. The effects for
each creature are determined by its Will save.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success For 1 round, the creature can’t use reactions and must
attempt another save at the start of its turn; on a failure, it
is slowed 1 for that turn as it sobs uncontrollably.
Failure As success, but the slowed 1 duration is 1 minute.
Critical Failure As failure, and the creature is automatically
slowed 1 for 1 minute.
Heightened (7th) The area increases to a 60-foot cone.
DANCING LIGHTS CANTRIP 1
CANTRIP EVOCATION LIGHT
Traditions arcane, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet
Duration sustained
You create up to four floating lights, no two of which are more
than 10 feet apart. Each sheds light like a torch. When you
Sustain the Spell, you can move any number of lights up to 60
feet. Each light must remain within 120 feet of you and within
10 feet of all others, or it winks out.
DARKNESS SPELL 2
DARKNESS EVOCATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult, primal
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Area 20-foot burst
Duration 1 minute
You create a shroud of darkness that prevents light from
penetrating or emanating within the area. Light does not enter
the area and any non-magical light sources, such as a torch
or lantern, do not emanate any light while inside the area,
even if their light radius would extend beyond the darkness.
This also suppresses magical light of your darkness spell’s
level or lower. Light can’t pass through, so creatures in the
area can’t see outside. From outside, it appears as a globe of
pure darkness.
Heightened (4th) Even creatures with darkvision (but not
greater darkvision) can barely see through the darkness. They
treat targets seen through the darkness as concealed.
DARKVISION SPELL 2
DIVINATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 hour
You grant yourself supernatural sight in areas of darkness.
You gain darkvision.
Heightened (3rd) The spell’s range is touch and it targets
1 willing creature.
Heightened (5th) The spell’s range is touch and it targets 1
willing creature. The duration is until the next time you make
your daily preparations.
DAZE CANTRIP 1
CANTRIP ENCHANTMENT MENTAL NONLETHAL
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 60 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration 1 round
You cloud the target’s mind and daze it with a mental jolt.
The jolt deals mental damage equal to your spellcasting
ability modifier; the target must attempt a basic Will save. If
the target critically fails the save, it is also stunned 1.
Heightened (+2) The damage increases by 1d6.
DEAFNESS SPELL 2
NECROMANCY
Traditions arcane, divine, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Fortitude
The target loses hearing; it must attempt a Fortitude save. The
target is then temporarily immune for 1 minute.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target is deafened for 1 round.
Failure The target is deafened for 10 minutes.
Critical Failure The target is deafened permanently.
327
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
DEATH KNELL SPELL 2
ATTACK DEATH NECROMANCY
Traditions divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 living creature that has 0 HP
Saving Throw Will
You snuff the life out of a creature on the brink of death. The
target must attempt a Will save. If this kills it, you gain 10
temporary HP and a +1 status bonus to attack and damage rolls
for 10 minutes.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target’s dying value increases by 1.
Failure The target dies.
DEATH WARD SPELL 5
ABJURATION
Traditions divine, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 living creature touched
Duration 10 minutes
You shield a creature from the ravages of negative energy.
It receives a +4 status bonus to saves against death and
negative effects, gains negative resistance 10, and suppresses
the effects of the doomed condition.
DETECT ALIGNMENT SPELL 1
UNCOMMON DETECTION DIVINATION
Traditions divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 30-foot emanation
Your eyes glow as you sense aligned auras. Choose chaotic,
evil, good, or lawful. You detect auras of that alignment. You
receive no information beyond presence or absence. You can
choose not to detect creatures or effects you’re aware have
that alignment.
Only creatures of 6th level or higher—unless divine
spellcasters, undead, or beings from the Outer Sphere—have
alignment auras.
Heightened (2nd) You learn each aura’s location and strength.
ALIGNMENT AURA
The strength of an alignment aura depends on the level
of the creature, item, or spell. The auras of undead, clerics
and other divine spellcasters with a patron deity, and
creatures from the Outer Sphere are one step stronger
than normal (faint instead of none, for example).
Creature or Spell or
Item Level Effect Level Aura Strength
0–5 — None
6–10 0–3 Faint
11–15 4–7 Moderate
16–20 8–9 Powerful
21+ 10 Overwhelming
DETECT MAGIC CANTRIP 1
CANTRIP DETECTION DIVINATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 30-foot emanation
You send out a pulse that registers the presence of magic. You
receive no information beyond the presence or absence of magic.
You can choose to ignore magic you’re fully aware of, such as the
magic items and ongoing spells of you and your allies.
You detect illusion magic only if that magic’s effect has a lower
level than the level of your detect magic spell. However, items
that have an illusion aura but aren’t deceptive in appearance
(such as an invisibility potion) typically are detected normally.
Heightened (3rd) You learn the school of magic for the highestlevel effect within range that the spell detects. If multiple
effects are equally strong, the GM determines which you learn.
Heightened (4th) As 3rd level, but you also pinpoint the source
of the highest-level magic. Like for an imprecise sense, you
don’t learn the exact location, but can narrow down the source
to within a 5-foot cube (or the nearest if larger than that).
DETECT POISON SPELL 1
UNCOMMON DETECTION DIVINATION
Traditions divine, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 object or creature
You detect whether a creature is venomous or poisonous, or if
an object is poison or has been poisoned. You do not ascertain
whether the target is poisonous in multiple ways, nor do you
learn the type or types of poison. Certain substances, like lead
and alcohol, are poisons and so mask other poisons.
Heightened (2nd) You learn the number and types of poison.
DETECT SCRYING SPELL 4
UNCOMMON DETECTION DIVINATION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 30-foot emanation
Duration 1 hour
By tapping into trace divinatory auras, you detect the presence
of scrying effects in the area. If detect scrying is higher level
than a scrying effect, you gain a glimpse of the scrying
creature and learn its approximate distance and direction.
Heightened (6th) The duration is until the next time you make
your daily preparations.
DIMENSION DOOR SPELL 4
CONJURATION TELEPORTATION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet
Opening a door that bypasses normal space, you instantly
transport yourself and any items you’re wearing and holding
from your current space to a clear space within range you can
see. If this would bring another creature with you—even if you’re
carrying it in an extradimensional container—the spell is lost.
Core Rulebook
328
Heightened (5th) The range increases to 1 mile. You don’t need
to be able to see your destination, as long as you have been
there in the past and know its relative location and distance
from you. You are temporarily immune for 1 hour.
DIMENSIONAL ANCHOR SPELL 4
ABJURATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration varies
You interfere with the target’s ability to teleport and
travel between dimensions. Dimensional anchor attempts
to counteract any teleportation effect, or any effect that
would move the target to a different plane. The duration is
determined by the target’s Will save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The effect’s duration is 1 minute.
Failure The effect’s duration is 10 minutes.
Critical Failure The effect’s duration is 1 hour.
DIMENSIONAL LOCK SPELL 7
UNCOMMON ABJURATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Area 60-foot burst
Duration 1 day
You create a shimmering barrier that attempts to counteract
teleportation effects and planar travel into or out of the
area, including items that allow access to extradimensional
spaces (such as a bag of holding). Dimensional lock tries
to counteract any attempt to summon a creature into the
area but doesn’t stop the creature from departing when the
summoning ends.
DINOSAUR FORM SPELL 4
POLYMORPH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
You channel the primal forces of nature to transform into a Large
animal battle form, specifically that of a powerful and terrifying
dinosaur. You must have space to expand or the spell is lost.
When you cast this spell, choose ankylosaurus, brontosaurus,
deinonychus, stegosaurus, triceratops, or tyrannosaurus. You
can decide the specific type of animal, but this has no effect
on the form’s Size or statistics. While in this form, you gain the
animal and dinosaur traits. You can Dismiss the spell.
You gain the following statistics and abilities regardless of
which battle form you choose:
• AC = 18 + your level. Ignore your armor’s check penalty
and Speed reduction.
• 15 temporary Hit Points.
• Low-light vision and imprecise scent 30 feet.
329
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
• One or more unarmed melee attacks specific to the
battle form you choose, which are the only attacks
you can use. You’re trained with them. Your attack
modifier is +16, and your damage bonus is +9. These
attacks are Strength based (for the purpose of the
enfeebled condition, for example). If your unarmed
attack modifier is higher, you can use it instead.
• Athletics modifier of +18, unless your own modifier
is higher.
You also gain specific abilities based on the form you choose:
• Ankylosaurus Speed 25 feet; Melee [one-action] tail (backswing,
reach 10 feet), Damage 2d6 bludgeoning; Melee [one-action]
foot, Damage 2d6 bludgeoning.
• Brontosaurus Speed 25 feet; Melee [one-action] tail (reach
15 feet), Damage 2d6 bludgeoning; Melee [one-action] foot,
Damage 2d8 bludgeoning.
• Deinonychus Speed 40 feet; Melee [one-action] talon (agile),
Damage 2d4 piercing plus 1 persistent bleed; Melee [one-action]
jaws, Damage 1d10 piercing.
• Stegosaurus Speed 30 feet; Melee [one-action] tail (reach 10
feet), Damage 2d8 piercing.
• Triceratops Speed 30 feet; Melee [one-action] horn, Damage
2d8 piercing, plus 1d6 persistent bleed on a critical hit;
Melee [one-action] foot, Damage 2d6 bludgeoning.
• Tyrannosaurus Speed 30 feet; Melee [one-action] jaws (deadly,
reach 10 feet), Damage 1d12 piercing; Melee [one-action] tail
(reach 10 feet), Damage 1d10 bludgeoning.
Heightened (5th) Your battle form is Huge and your attacks have
15-foot reach, or 20-foot reach if they started with 15-foot reach.
You instead gain 20 temporary HP, an attack modifier of +18, a
damage bonus of +6, double the damage dice, and Athletics +21.
Heightened (7th) Your battle form is Gargantuan and your
attacks have 20-foot reach, or 25-foot reach if they started
with 15-foot reach. You instead gain AC = 21 + your level, 25
temporary HP, an attack modifier of +25, a damage bonus of
+15, double the damage dice, and Athletics +25.
DISAPPEARANCE SPELL 8
ILLUSION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] material, somatic
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Duration 10 minutes
You shroud a creature from others’ senses. The target becomes
undetected, not just to sight but to all senses, allowing the target
to count as invisible no matter what precise and imprecise senses
an observer might have. It’s still possible for a creature to find
the target by Seeking, looking for disturbed dust, hearing gaps in
the sound spectrum, or finding some other way to discover the
presence of an otherwise-undetectable creature.
DISCERN LIES SPELL 4
UNCOMMON DIVINATION MENTAL REVELATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 10 minutes
Falsehoods ring in your ears like discordant notes. You gain
a +4 status bonus to Perception checks when someone Lies.
DISCERN LOCATION SPELL 8
UNCOMMON DETECTION DIVINATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast 10 minutes (material, somatic, verbal)
Range unlimited; Targets 1 creature or object
You learn the name of the target’s exact location (including
the building, community, and country) and plane of existence.
You can target a creature only if you’ve seen it in person,
have one of its significant belongings, or have a piece of its
body. To target an object, you must have touched it or have
a fragment of it. Discern location automatically overcomes
protections against detection and divination of lower level than
this spell, even if they would normally have a chance to block it.
DISINTEGRATE SPELL 6
EVOCATION
Traditions arcane
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Targets 1 creature or unattended object
Saving Throw Fortitude
You fire a green ray at your target. Make a spell attack. You
deal 12d10 damage, and the target must attempt a basic
Fortitude save. On a critical hit, treat the save result as one
degree worse. A creature reduced to 0 HP is reduced to fine
powder; its gear remains.
An object you hit is destroyed (no save), regardless of
Hardness, unless it’s an artifact or similarly hard to destroy.
A single casting can destroy no more than a 10-foot cube of
matter. This automatically destroys any force construct, such
as a wall of force.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d10.
DISJUNCTION SPELL 9
UNCOMMON ABJURATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Targets 1 magic item
Crackling energy disjoins the target. You attempt to counteract
it (page 458). If you succeed, it’s deactivated for 1 week. On a
critical success, it’s destroyed. If it’s an artifact or similar item,
you automatically fail.
DISPEL MAGIC SPELL 2
ABJURATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Targets 1 spell effect or unattended magic item
You unravel the magic behind a spell or effect. Attempt a
counteract check against the target (page 458). If you succeed
against a spell effect, you counteract it. If you succeed against a
magic item, the item becomes a mundane item of its type for 10
minutes. This doesn’t change the item’s non-magical properties.
If the target is an artifact or similar item, you automatically fail.
Core Rulebook
330
DISRUPT UNDEAD CANTRIP 1
NECROMANCY POSITIVE
Traditions divine, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 undead creature
Saving Throw Fortitude
You lance the target with energy. You deal 1d6 positive
damage plus your spellcasting ability modifier. The target
must attempt a basic Fortitude save. If the creature critically
fails the save, it is also enfeebled 1 for 1 round.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d6.
DISRUPTING WEAPONS SPELL 1
NECROMANCY POSITIVE
Traditions divine
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets up to two weapons, each of which must
be wielded by you or a willing ally, or else unattended
Duration 1 minute
You infuse weapons with positive energy. Attacks with these
weapons deal an extra 1d4 positive damage to undead.
Heightened (3rd) The damage increases to 2d4 damage.
Heightened (5th) Target up to three weapons, and the damage
increases to 3d4 damage.
DIVINE AURA SPELL 8
ABJURATION
Traditions divine
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 10-foot emanation; Targets allies in the area
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
Divine power wards the targets, granting each a +1 status
bonus to AC and saves while in the area.
Choose an alignment your deity has (chaotic, evil, good, or
lawful). You can’t cast this spell if you don’t have a deity or your
deity is true neutral. This spell gains the trait of the alignment
you chose. The bonuses granted by the spell increase to +2
against attacks by—and effects created by—creatures with an
alignment opposite to the spell (lawful if you chose chaotic,
evil if you chose good). These bonuses increase to +4 against
effects created by such creatures that attempt to impose the
controlled condition on a target of your divine aura, as well
as against attacks made by creatures summoned by anything
opposite in alignment to your divine aura.
When a creature of opposite alignment hits a target with a
melee attack, the creature must succeed at a Will save or be
blinded for 1 minute. It’s then temporarily immune for 1 minute.
The first time you Sustain the Spell each round, the divine
aura’s radius grows 10 feet.
DIVINE DECREE SPELL 7
EVOCATION
Traditions divine
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 40 feet; Area 40-foot emanation
Saving Throw Fortitude; Duration varies
You utter a potent litany from your faith, a mandate that
harms those who oppose your ideals. Choose an alignment
your deity has (chaotic, evil, good, or lawful). You can’t
cast this spell if you don’t have a deity or your deity is true
neutral. This spell gains the trait of the alignment you chose.
You deal 7d10 damage to creatures in the area; each creature
must attempt a Fortitude save. Creatures with an alignment
that matches the one you chose are unaffected by the spell.
Those that neither match nor oppose it treat the result of
their saving throw as one degree better and don’t suffer
effects other than damage.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature takes half damage.
Failure The creature takes full damage and is enfeebled 2 for
1 minute.
Critical Failure The creature takes double damage and is
enfeebled 2 for 1 minute. On your home plane, a creature
that critically fails is banished with the effect of a failed
banishment save. A 10th-level creature or lower must
attempt a Will save. On a failure, it’s paralyzed for 1 minute;
on a critical failure, it dies.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d10, and the level
of creatures that must attempt a second save on a critical
failure increases by 2.
DIVINE INSPIRATION SPELL 8
ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Traditions divine
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 willing creature
You infuse a target with spiritual energy, refreshing its magic.
If it prepares spells, it recovers one 6th-level or lower spell
it previously cast today and can cast that spell again. If it
spontaneously casts spells, it recovers one of its 6th-level or
lower spell slots. If it has a focus pool, it regains its Focus
Points, as if it had Refocused.
DIVINE LANCE CANTRIP 1
ATTACK CANTRIP EVOCATION
Traditions divine
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
You unleash a beam of divine energy. Choose an alignment your
deity has (chaotic, evil, good, or lawful). You can’t cast this spell
if you don’t have a deity or if your deity is true neutral. Make
a ranged spell attack roll against the target’s AC. On a hit, the
target takes damage of the chosen alignment type equal to 1d4
+ your spellcasting ability modifier (double damage on a critical
hit). The spell gains the trait of the alignment you chose.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d4.
DIVINE VESSEL SPELL 7
MORPH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions divine
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
331
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
You accept otherworldly energies into your body; while you
are still recognizably yourself, you gain the features of one
of your deity’s servitors. Choose an alignment your deity has
(chaotic, evil, good, or lawful). You can’t cast this spell if you
don’t have a deity or your deity is true neutral. This spell gains
the trait of the alignment you chose.
If you were Medium or smaller, you become Large, as the
effects of enlarge. You must have space to expand into, or the
spell is lost. You also gain the following benefits.
• 40 temporary Hit Points.
• A fly Speed equal to your Speed.
• Weakness 10 to the alignment opposite the one
you chose.
• A +1 status bonus to saves against spells.
• Darkvision.
• Your unarmed attacks and weapons deal 1 additional
damage of the chosen alignment type.
• One or more unarmed melee attacks. If you chose good
or lawful, your fist attacks deal 2d8 damage. If you
chose chaotic, you gain a bite unarmed attack that
deals 2d10 piercing damage. If you chose evil, you
gain a claws unarmed attack that deals 2d8 slashing
damage and has the agile and finesse traits.
Heightened (9th) The temporary Hit Points increase to 60,
the weakness increases to 15, and the duration increases to
10 minutes.
DIVINE WRATH SPELL 4
EVOCATION
Traditions divine
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Area 20-foot burst
Saving Throw Fortitude
You can channel the fury of your deity against foes of opposed
alignment. Choose an alignment your deity has (chaotic, evil,
good, or lawful). You can’t cast this spell if you don’t have a
deity or your deity is true neutral. This spell gains the trait
of the alignment you chose. You deal 4d10 damage of the
alignment you chose; each creature in the area must attempt a
Fortitude save. Creatures that match the alignment you chose
are unaffected. Those that neither match nor oppose it treat
the result of their saving throw as one degree better.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature takes half damage.
Failure The creature takes full damage and is sickened 1.
Critical Failure The creature takes full damage and is sickened
2; while it is sickened, it is also slowed 1.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d10.
DOMINATE SPELL 6
UNCOMMON ENCHANTMENT INCAPACITATION MENTAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration until the next time you make
your daily preparations
You take command of the target, forcing it to obey your orders.
If  you issue an obviously self-destructive order, the target
doesn’t act until you issue a new order. The effect depends
on its Will save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target is stunned 1 as it fights off your commands.
Failure The target follows your orders but can attempt a Will save
at the end of each of its turns. On a success, the spell ends.
Critical Failure As a failure, but the target receives a new save
only if you give it a new order that is against its nature,
such as killing its allies.
Heightened (10th) The duration is unlimited.
DRAGON FORM SPELL 6
POLYMORPH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
Calling upon powerful transformative magic, you gain a Large
dragon battle form. You must have space to expand or the spell
is lost. When you cast this spell, choose one type of chromatic
or metallic dragon. While in this form, you gain the dragon trait.
You have hands in this battle form and can take manipulate
actions. You can Dismiss the spell.
You gain the following statistics and abilities regardless of
which battle form you choose:
• AC = 18 + your level. Ignore your armor’s check penalty
and Speed reduction.
• 10 temporary Hit Points.
• Speed 40 feet, fly Speed 100 feet.
• Resistance 10 against the damage type of your breath
weapon (see below).
• Darkvision and imprecise scent 60 feet.
• One or more unarmed melee attacks specific to the battle
form you choose, which are the only attacks you can use.
You’re trained with them. Your attack modifier is +22,
and your damage bonus is +6. These attacks are Strength
based (for the purpose of the enfeebled condition, for
example). If your unarmed attack modifier is higher, you
can use it instead. See below for more on these attacks.
• Athletics modifier of +23, unless your own modifier
is higher.
• Breath Weapon [two-actions] (arcane, evocation) The shape,
damage, and damage type of your breath weapon
depend on your specific dragon form (see below). A
creature in the area attempts a basic save against
your spell DC. This is a Reflex save unless stated
otherwise in the special ability description for your
specific dragon form. Once activated, your breath
weapon can’t be used again for 1d4 rounds. Your
breath weapon has the trait corresponding to the
type of damage it deals.
You also gain specific abilities based on the type of dragon
you choose:
• Black swim Speed 60 feet; Melee [one-action] jaws, Damage 2d12
piercing plus 2d6 acid; Melee [one-action] claw (agile), Damage
Core Rulebook
332
3d10 slashing; Melee[one-action] tail (reach 10 feet), Damage 3d10
bludgeoning; Melee [one-action] horns (reach 10 feet), Damage
3d8 piercing; breath weapon 60-foot line, 11d6 acid.
• Blue burrow Speed 20 feet; Melee [one-action] jaws, Damage
2d10 piercing plus 1d12 electricity; Melee [one-action] claw
(agile), Damage 3d10 slashing; Melee [one-action] tail (reach
10 feet), Damage 3d10 bludgeoning; Melee [one-action] horns
(reach 10 feet), Damage 3d8 piercing; breath weapon
80-foot line, 6d12 electricity.
• Green swim Speed 40 feet, ignores difficult terrain
from non-magical foliage; Melee [one-action] jaws, Damage
2d12 piercing plus 2d6 poison; Melee [one-action] claw (agile),
Damage 3d10 slashing; Melee [one-action] tail (reach 10 feet),
Damage 3d10 bludgeoning; Melee [one-action] horns (reach 10
feet), Damage 3d8 piercing; breath weapon 30-foot
cone, 10d6 poison (Fortitude save instead of Reflex).
• Red ignore concealed from smoke; Melee[one-action] jaws, Damage
2d12 piercing plus 2d6 fire; Melee[one-action] claw (agile), Damage
4d6 slashing; Melee [one-action] tail (reach 10 feet), Damage 3d10
bludgeoning; Melee [one-action] wing (reach 10 feet), Damage 3d8
bludgeoning; breath weapon 30-foot cone, 10d6 fire.
• White climb Speed 25 feet on ice only; Melee [one-action] jaws,
Damage 3d6 piercing plus 2d6 cold; Melee [one-action] claw
(agile), Damage 3d10 slashing; Melee [one-action] tail (reach
10 feet), Damage 3d10 bludgeoning; breath weapon
30-foot cone, 10d6 cold.
• Brass burrow Speed 20 feet; Melee [one-action] jaws, Damage
3d8 piercing plus 2d4 fire; Melee [one-action] claw (agile), 3d10
slashing; Melee [one-action] tail (reach 10 feet), Damage 3d10
bludgeoning; Melee [one-action] spikes (reach 10 feet), Damage
3d8 piercing; breath weapon 60-foot line, 15d4 fire.
• Bronze swim Speed 40 feet; Melee [one-action] jaws, Damage
2d10 piercing plus 1d12 electricity; Melee [one-action] claw
(agile), Damage 3d10 slashing; Melee [one-action] tail (reach
10 feet), Damage 3d10 bludgeoning; Melee [one-action] wing
(reach 10 feet), Damage 3d8 slashing; breath weapon
80-foot line, 6d12 electricity.
• Copper climb Speed 25 feet on stone only; Melee [one-action]
jaws, Damage 2d12 piercing plus 2d6 acid; Melee
[one-action] claw (agile), Damage 3d10 slashing; Melee [one-action] tail
(reach 10 feet), Damage 3d10 bludgeoning; Melee [one-action]
wing (reach 10 feet), Damage 3d8 bludgeoning; breath
weapon 60-foot line, 10d6 acid.
• Gold swim Speed 40 feet; Melee [one-action] jaws, Damage 2d12
piercing plus 2d6 fire; Melee [one-action] claw (agile), Damage
4d6 slashing; Melee [one-action] tail (reach 10 feet), Damage 3d10
bludgeoning; Melee [one-action] horns (reach 10 feet), Damage
3d8 piercing; breath weapon 30-foot cone, 6d10 fire.
• Silver walk on clouds; Melee [one-action] jaws, Damage 2d12
piercing plus 2d6 cold; Melee [one-action] claw (agile), Damage
3d10 slashing; Melee [one-action] tail (reach 10), Damage 3d10
bludgeoning; breath weapon 30-foot cone, 8d8 cold.
Heightened (8th) Your battle form is Huge, you gain a +20-foot
status bonus to your fly Speed, and your attacks have 10-foot
reach (or 15-foot reach if they previously had 10-foot reach).
You instead gain AC = 21 + your level, 15 temporary HP, an
attack modifier of +28, a damage bonus of +12, Athletics +28,
and a +14 status bonus to breath weapon damage.
DREAM COUNCIL SPELL 8
ILLUSION MENTAL SLEEP
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast 10 minutes (somatic, verbal)
Range planetary; Targets up to 12 creatures you know by
name and have met in person
Duration 1 hour
When you Cast this Spell, any targets—including you—can choose
to immediately fall asleep. The spell ends for any creatures that
don’t choose to fall asleep. Sleepers join a shared dream, where
they can communicate with one another as though they were in
the same room. Individual targets leave this shared dream upon
awakening, and if all the targets awaken, the spell ends.
DREAM MESSAGE SPELL 3
ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast 10 minutes (somatic, verbal)
Range planetary; Targets 1 creature you know by name and
have met in person
Duration 1 day
You send a message to your target’s dream. The message is
one-way, up to 1 minute of speech (roughly 150 words). If
the target is asleep, they receive the message instantly. If
not, they receive it the next time they sleep. As soon as they
receive it, the spell ends, and you know the message was sent.
Heightened (4th) You can target up to 10 creatures you know by
name and have met in person. You must send the same message
to all of them; the spell ends for each creature individually.
DREAMING POTENTIAL SPELL 5
ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Traditions occult
Cast 10 minutes (material, somatic, verbal)
Range touch; Targets 1 willing sleeping creature
Duration 8 hours
You draw the target into a lucid dream where it can explore
the endless possibilities of its own potential within the everchanging backdrop of its dreamscape. If it sleeps the full 8 hours
uninterrupted, when it wakes, it counts as having spent a day
of downtime retraining, though it can’t use dreaming potential
for any retraining that would require either an instructor or
specialized knowledge it can’t access within the dream.
DROP DEAD SPELL 5
UNCOMMON ILLUSION VISUAL
Traditions arcane, divine
Cast [reaction] somatic; Trigger A creature within range is hit by an
attack from an enemy.
Range 120 feet; Targets 1 creature
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
The target appears to fall down dead, though it actually turns
invisible. Its illusory corpse remains where it fell, complete with
333
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
a believable fatal wound. This illusion looks and feels like a
dead body. If the target’s death seems absurd—for instance, a
barbarian at full health appears to be slain by 2 damage—the
GM can grant the attacker an immediate Perception check to
disbelieve the illusion. If the target uses hostile actions, the
spell ends. This ends the entire spell, so the illusory corpse
disappears too.
Heightened (7th) The spell doesn’t end if the target uses
hostile actions.
DUPLICATE FOE SPELL 7
CONJURATION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 enemy of level 15 or lower
Saving Throw Fortitude; Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You try to create a temporary duplicate of an enemy to fight
on your behalf. The target can attempt a Fortitude save to
disrupt the spell. The duplicate appears in an unoccupied space
adjacent to the target and has the target’s attack modifier, AC,
saving throw modifiers, Perception, and skill modifiers, but it
has only 70 Hit Points and lacks the target’s special abilities,
including immunities, resistances, and weaknesses. It has no
magic items except weapon potency runes.
The duplicate gains the minion trait, and it can only Stride
and Strike. Its Strikes deal the target’s normal damage but don’t
apply added effects, since it doesn’t have special abilities. The
spell automatically ends if the duplicate’s Hit Points drop to 0.
The duplicate attacks your enemies to the best of its
abilities. You can also try to give it additional instructions;
when you Sustain the Spell, you can also Command a Minion
as part of your action, but the GM determines whether the
duplicate follows your command.
The duplicate is unstable, so each turn after it takes its
actions, it loses 4d6 Hit Points. It’s not a living creature, and it
can never regain its lost Hit Points in any way.
Critical Success You fail to create a duplicate.
Success The duplicate deals half damage with its Strikes and
the duration is reduced to a maximum of 2 rounds.
Failure The duplicate works as described.
Heightened (+1) The level of creature you can target increases
by 2. The duplicate has 10 more HP.
EARTHBIND SPELL 3
TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Targets 1 flying creature
Saving Throw Fortitude; Duration varies
Using the weight of earth, you hamper a target’s flight, with
effects based on its Fortitude save. If the creature reaches the
ground safely, it doesn’t take falling damage.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target falls safely up to 120 feet.
Failure The target falls safely up to 120 feet. If it hits the ground,
it can’t Fly, levitate, or otherwise leave the ground for 1 round.
Critical Failure The target falls safely up to 120 feet. If it hits
the ground, it can’t Fly, levitate, or otherwise leave the
ground for 1 minute.
EARTHQUAKE SPELL 8
EARTH EVOCATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 500 feet; Area 60-foot burst
Duration 1 round
You shake the ground, topple creatures into fissures, and
collapse structures.
The GM might add additional effects in certain areas. Cliffs
might collapse, causing creatures to fall, or a lake might
drain as fissures open up below its surface, leaving a morass
of quicksand.
• Shaking Ground The ground is difficult terrain, and
creatures on it take a –2 circumstance penalty to
attack rolls, AC, and skill checks.
• Fissures Each creature on the ground must attempt a
Reflex save at the start of its turn to keep its footing
and avoid falling into 40-foot-deep fissures that open
beneath it. The fissures are permanent, and their sides
require DC 15 Athletics to Climb.
• Collapse Structures and ceilings might collapse. The
GM rolls a flat check for each (DC 16 for a sturdy
structure, DC 14 for an average structure and most
natural formations, DC 9 for a shoddy structure,
all adjusted higher or lower as the GM sees fit). A
collapse deals 11d6 bludgeoning damage; each
creature caught in a collapse must attempt a Reflex
save to avoid it.
Critical Success The creature takes half the collapse damage.
Success The creature takes half the collapse damage and
falls prone.
Failure The creature takes the full collapse damage and
falls prone.
Critical Failure The creature takes the full collapse damage
and falls into a fissure.
Heightened (10th) You create a massive earthquake that can
devastate a settlement. The range increases to half a mile and
the area to a quarter-mile burst.
ECLIPSE BURST SPELL 7
COLD DARKNESS NECROMANCY NEGATIVE
Traditions arcane, divine, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 500 feet; Area 60-foot burst
Saving Throw Reflex
A globe of freezing darkness explodes in the area, dealing
8d10 cold damage to creatures and objects in the area, plus
8d4 additional negative damage to living creatures. Creatures
and objects in the area must attempt a Reflex save.
If the globe overlaps with an area of magical light or affects
a creature affected by magical light, eclipse burst attempts to
counteract the light effect.
Core Rulebook
334
Critical Success The creature or object is unaffected.
Success The creature or object takes half damage.
Failure The creature or object takes full damage.
Critical Failure The creature or object takes double damage.
If it’s a creature, it becomes blinded by the darkness for
an unlimited duration. Heightened (+1) The cold damage
increases by 1d10 and the negative damage against the living
increases by 1d4.
ELECTRIC ARC CANTRIP 1
CANTRIP ELECTRICITY EVOCATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 or 2 creatures
Saving Throw basic Reflex
An arc of lightning leaps from one target to another. You
deal electricity damage equal to 1d4 plus your spellcasting
ability modifier.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d4.
ELEMENTAL FORM SPELL 5
POLYMORPH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
You call upon the power of the planes to transform into a
Medium elemental battle form. When you cast this spell,
choose air, earth, fire, or water. While in this form, you gain
the corresponding trait and the elemental trait. You have
hands in this battle form and can take manipulate actions.
You can Dismiss the spell.
You gain the following statistics and abilities regardless of
which battle form you choose:
• AC = 19 + your level. Ignore your armor’s check penalty
and Speed reduction.
• 10 temporary Hit Points.
• Darkvision.
• One or more unarmed melee attacks specific to the
battle form you choose, which are the only attacks
you can use. You’re trained with them. Your attack
modifier is +18, and your damage bonus is +9. These
are Dexterity based (air or fire) or Strength based
(earth or water). If your corresponding unarmed attack
modifier is higher, you can use it instead.
• Acrobatics (air or fire) or Athletics (earth or water)
modifier of +20; ignore this change if your own
modifier is higher.
You also gain specific abilities based on the type of
elemental you choose:
• Air fly Speed 80 feet, movement doesn’t trigger
reactions; Melee [one-action] gust, Damage 1d4 bludgeoning.
• Earth Speed 20 feet, burrow Speed 20 feet; Melee [one-action]
fist, Damage 2d10 bludgeoning.
• Fire Speed 50 feet; fire resistance 10, weakness 5 to
cold and 5 to water; Melee [one-action] tendril, Damage 1d8 fire
plus 1d4 persistent fire.
• Water Speed 20 feet, swim Speed 60 feet; fire
resistance 5; Melee [one-action] wave, Damage 1d12
bludgeoning, and you can spend an action
immediately after a hit to push the target 5 feet with
the effects of a successful Shove.
Heightened (6th) Your battle form is Large and your attacks
have 10-foot reach. You must have space to expand or the spell
is lost. You instead gain AC = 22 + your level, 15 temporary
HP, an attack modifier of +23, a damage bonus of +13, and
Acrobatics or Athletics +23.
Heightened (7th) Your battle form is Huge and your attacks
have 15-foot reach. You must have space to expand or the spell
is lost. You instead gain AC = 22 + your level, 20 temporary
HP, an attack modifier of +25, a damage bonus of +11, double
the number of damage dice (including persistent damage), and
Acrobatics or Athletics +25.
ENDURE ELEMENTS SPELL 2
ABJURATION
Traditions arcane, divine, primal
Cast 10 minutes (somatic, verbal)
Range touch; Targets 1 willing creature
Duration until the next time you make your daily preparations
You shield the target against dangerous temperatures.
Choose severe cold or heat. The target is protected from the
temperature you chose (but not extreme cold or heat).
Heightened (3rd) The target is protected from severe cold
and heat.
Heightened (5th) The target is protected from severe cold,
severe heat, extreme cold, and extreme heat.
ENERGY AEGIS SPELL 7
ABJURATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult, primal
Cast 1 minute (material, somatic, verbal)
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Duration 24 hours
You protect the target with a powerful, long-lasting energy
barrier. The target gains resistance 5 to acid, cold, electricity,
fire, force, negative, positive, and sonic damage.
Heightened (9th) The resistances increase to 10.
ENHANCE VICTUALS SPELL 2
TRANSMUTATION
Traditions divine, primal
Cast 1 minute (material, somatic, verbal)
Range touch; Targets up to 1 gallon of non-magical water or up
to 5 pounds of food
Duration 1 hour
You transform the target into delicious fare, changing water
into wine or another fine beverage or enhancing the food’s
taste and ingredients to make it a gourmet treat.
Prior to the transformation, the spell attempts to counteract
any poisons in the food or water. The food turns back to
normal if not consumed before the duration expires, though
any poisons that were counteracted are still gone.
335
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Heightened (+1) The number of gallons of water you can target
increases by 1, or the number of pounds of food you can target
increases by 5.
ENLARGE SPELL 2
POLYMORPH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 willing creature
Duration 5 minutes
Bolstered by magical power, the target grows to size Large.
Its equipment grows with it but returns to natural size if
removed. The creature is clumsy 1. Its reach increases by 5
feet (or by 10 feet if it started out Tiny), and it gains a +2
status bonus to melee damage. This spell has no effect on a
Large or larger creature.
Heightened (4th) The creature instead grows to size Huge.
The status bonus to melee damage is +4 and the creature’s
reach increases by 10 feet (or 15 feet if the creature started
out Tiny). The spell has no effect on a Huge or larger creature.
Heightened (6th) As level 4, but you can target up to 10 creatures.
ENTANGLE SPELL 2
PLANT TRANSMUTATION
Traditions primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Area all squares in a 20-foot-radius burst that
contain plants
Duration 1 minute
Plants in the area entangle creatures. The area counts as difficult
terrain. Each round that a creature starts its turn in the area,
it must attempt a Reflex save. On a failure, it takes a –10-foot
circumstance penalty to its Speeds until it leaves the area, and
on a critical failure, it is also immobilized for 1 round. Creatures
can attempt to Escape at entangle’s DC to remove these effects.
ENTHRALL SPELL 3
AUDITORY ENCHANTMENT EMOTION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Targets all creatures in range
Saving Throw Will; Duration sustained
Your words fascinate your targets. You speak or sing without
interruption throughout the casting and duration. Targets
who notice your speech or song might give their undivided
attention; each target must attempt a Will save. The GM might
grant a circumstance bonus (to a maximum of +4) if the target
is of an opposing religion, ancestry, or political leaning, or is
otherwise unlikely to agree with what you’re saying.
Each creature that comes within range has to attempt a
save when you Sustain the Spell. If you’re speaking, enthrall
gains the linguistic trait.
Critical Success The target is unaffected and notices that you
tried to use magic.
Success The target needn’t pay attention but doesn’t notice
you tried to use magic (it might notice others are enthralled).
Failure The target is fascinated with you. It can attempt another
Will save if it witnesses actions or speech with which it
disagrees. If it succeeds, it’s no longer fascinated and is
temporarily immune for 1 hour. If the target is subject to a
hostile act, or if another creature succeeds at a Diplomacy or
Intimidation check against it, the fascination ends immediately.
Critical Failure As failure, but the target can’t attempt a save
to end the fascination if it disagrees with you.
ETHEREAL JAUNT SPELL 7
UNCOMMON CONJURATION TELEPORTATION
Traditions divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You travel to the Ethereal Plane, which overlaps the Material
Plane. Material Plane creatures can’t see you, and you can
move through things on the Material Plane. You move at half
your normal Speeds, but can move in any direction (including
up and down).
You can see onto the Material Plane within a radius of 60
feet; it is gray, hazy, and concealed from you. You can’t affect
the Material Plane, and you can’t be affected by the Material
Plane except by force effects and abjurations originating there.
When the spell ends, you return to the Material Plane. If
you’re in the air, you fall (unless you can fly), and if you’re
inside an object, you’re pushed into the nearest open space
and take 1d6 damage per 5 feet you were pushed.
If you cast this spell when not on the Material Plane, it is lost.
Heightened (9th) You can target up to five additional willing
creatures at a range of 30 feet. The duration is up to 10 minutes.
FABRICATED TRUTH SPELL 10
ENCHANTMENT INCAPACITATION MENTAL
Traditions occult
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 100 feet; Targets up to 5 creatures
Saving Throw Will; Duration varies
Choose a single statement you want the targets to believe. The
fact could be narrow, such as “a dragon is circling overhead
and wants to kill me”; wide-reaching, such as “all humanoids
are disguised abominations”; or conceptual, such as “if I don’t
live a kinder life, I’ll be punished in the afterlife.” The targets’
experiences color how they react to this “truth” and how
their behavior changes. If the statement changes what they
perceive, they treat the change as a sudden revelation.
The effect of the spell depends on the targets’ Will saves. If
a target is already subject to fabricated truth, your spell tries
to counteract it. If the counteract check fails, the outcome of
the target’s saving throw can’t be worse than a success.
Critical Success The target doesn’t believe the statement, and
it knows you tried to trick it.
Success The target doesn’t believe the statement or realize
you tried to trick it.
Failure The target believes the statement for a duration of 1 week.
Critical Failure The target believes the statement with
unlimited duration.
Core Rulebook
336
FAERIE FIRE SPELL 2
EVOCATION LIGHT
Traditions divine, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Area 10-foot burst
Duration 5 minutes
All creatures in the area when you cast the spell are limned
in colorful, heatless fire of a color of your choice for the
duration. Visible creatures can’t be concealed while affected
by faerie fire. If the creatures are invisible, they are concealed
while affected by faerie fire, rather than being undetected.
FALSE LIFE SPELL 2
NECROMANCY
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 8 hours
You create a reservoir of vitality from necromantic energy,
gaining a number of temporary Hit Points equal to 6 plus your
spellcasting ability modifier.
Heightened (+1) The temporary Hit Points increase by 3.
FALSE VISION SPELL 5
UNCOMMON ILLUSION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast 10 minutes (material, somatic, verbal)
Range touch; Area 100-foot burst
Duration until the next time you make your daily preparations
You create a false image that fools any attempts to scry on
an area. Any scrying spell sees, hears, smells, and otherwise
detects whatever you wish within the area, rather than what
is actually in the area. You can Sustain the Spell each round
to change the illusion as you desire, including playing out a
complex scene. If the scrying spell is of a higher level than
false vision, the scryer can attempt a Perception check to
disbelieve the illusion, though even if they’re successful,
they can’t learn what’s truly going on in the area.
FEAR SPELL 1
EMOTION ENCHANTMENT FEAR MENTAL
Traditions arcane, divine, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration varies
You plant fear in the target; it must attempt a Will save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target is frightened 1.
Failure The target is frightened 2.
Critical Failure The target is frightened 3 and fleeing for 1
round.
Heightened (3rd) You can target up to five creatures.
FEATHER FALL SPELL 1
ABJURATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast [reaction] verbal; Trigger A creature within range is falling.
Range 60 feet; Targets 1 falling creature
Duration 1 minute
You cause the air itself to arrest a fall. The target’s fall slows to
60 feet per round, and the portion of the fall during the spell’s
duration doesn’t count when calculating falling damage. If the
target reaches the ground while the spell is in effect, it takes no
damage from the fall. The spell ends as soon as the target lands.
FEEBLEMIND SPELL 6
CURSE ENCHANTMENT INCAPACITATION MENTAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration varies
You drastically reduce the target’s mental faculties. The target
must attempt a Will save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target is stupefied 2 for 1 round.
Failure The target is stupefied 4 with an unlimited duration.
Critical Failure The target’s intellect is permanently reduced
below that of an animal, and it treats its Charisma, Intelligence,
and Wisdom modifiers as –5. It loses all class abilities that
require mental faculties, including all spellcasting. If the
target is a PC, they become an NPC under the GM’s control.
FEET TO FINS SPELL 3
MORPH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 willing creature
Duration 10 minutes
The target’s feet transform into fins, improving mobility in
the water but reducing it on land. The target gains a swim
Speed equal to its normal land Speed, but its land Speed
becomes 5 feet.
Heightened (6th) The spell lasts until the next time you make
your daily preparations.
FIELD OF LIFE SPELL 6
HEALING NECROMANCY POSITIVE
Traditions divine, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Area 20-foot burst
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
A field of positive energy fills the area, exuding warmth and
rejuvenating those within. Each living creature that starts its
turn in the area regains 1d8 Hit Points, and any undead creature
that starts its turn in the area takes 1d8 positive damage.
Heightened (8th) The healing and damage increase to 1d10.
Heightened (9th) The healing and damage increase to 1d12.
FIERY BODY SPELL 7
FIRE POLYMORPH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
337
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
You become living flame, giving you fire immunity,
resistance 10 to precision damage, and weakness 5 to cold
and to water. Any creature that touches you or damages
you with an unarmed attack or non-reach melee weapon
takes 3d6 fire damage.
Your unarmed attacks deal 1d4 additional fire damage, and
your fire spells deal one additional die of fire damage (of the
same damage die the spell uses). You can cast produce flame
as an innate spell; the casting is reduced from 2 actions to 1.
In fire form, you have a fly Speed of 40 feet and don’t need
to breathe.
Heightened (9th) Creatures touching you take 4d6 fire damage
instead of 3d6, your unarmed attacks deal 2d4 additional fire
damage, and you have a fly Speed of 60 feet.
FINGER OF DEATH SPELL 7
DEATH NECROMANCY
Traditions divine, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 living creature
Saving Throw basic Fortitude
You point your finger toward the target and speak a word
of slaying. You deal 70 negative damage to the target. If the
damage from finger of death reduces the target to 0 Hit Points,
the target dies instantly.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 10.
FIRE SEEDS SPELL 6
EVOCATION FIRE PLANT
Traditions primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Saving Throw basic Reflex; Duration 1 minute
Four acorns grow in your hand, their shells streaked with
pulsing red and orange patterns. You or anyone else who has
one of the acorns can toss it up to 30 feet with an Interact
action. It explodes in a 5-foot burst, dealing 4d6 fire damage.
The save uses your spell DC, even if someone else throws
the acorn.
Flames continue to burn on the ground in the burst for
1  minute, dealing 2d6 fire damage to any creature that
enters the flames or ends its turn within them. A creature
can take damage from the continuing flames only once per
round, even if it’s in overlapping areas of fire created by
different acorns.
When the spell ends, any remaining acorns rot and turn to
ordinary soil.
Heightened (8th) The burst’s damage increases to 5d6, and
the continuing flames damage increases to 3d6.
Heightened (9th) The burst’s damage increases to 6d6, and
the continuing flames damage increases to 3d6.
FIRE SHIELD SPELL 4
EVOCATION FIRE
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
You wreathe yourself in ghostly flames, gaining cold
resistance 5. Additionally, adjacent creatures that hit you
with a melee attack, as well as creatures that touch you or
hit you with an unarmed attack, take 2d6 fire damage each
time they do.
Heightened (+2) The cold resistance increases by 5, and the
fire damage increases by 1d6.
FIREBALL SPELL 3
EVOCATION FIRE
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 500 feet; Area 20-foot burst
Saving Throw basic Reflex
A roaring blast of fire appears at a spot you designate, dealing
6d6 fire damage.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d6.
FLAME STRIKE SPELL 5
EVOCATION FIRE
Traditions divine
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Area 10-foot radius, 40-foot-tall cylinder
Saving Throw basic Reflex
You call a rain of divine fire that plummets down from above,
dealing 8d6 fire damage. Because the flame is infused with
divine energy, creatures in the area apply only half their usual
fire resistance. Creatures that are immune to fire, instead of
gaining the usual benefit of immunity, treat the results of their
saving throws as one degree of success better.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d6.
FLAMING SPHERE SPELL 2
EVOCATION FIRE
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Area 1 5-foot square
Saving Throw Reflex; Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You create a sphere of flame in a square within range. The
sphere must be supported by a solid surface, such as a stone
floor. The sphere deals 3d6 fire damage to each creature in
the square where it first appears; each creature must attempt
a basic Reflex save. On subsequent rounds, you can Sustain
this Spell, leaving the sphere in its square or rolling it to
another square within range and dealing 3d6 fire damage;
each creature in its square must attempt a basic Reflex save.
Creatures that succeed at their save take no damage
(instead of half).
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d6.
FLEET STEP SPELL 1
TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
You gain a +30-foot status bonus to your Speed.
Core Rulebook
338
FLESH TO STONE SPELL 6
TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Targets 1 creature made of flesh
Saving Throw Fortitude; Duration varies
You try to turn the target’s flesh into stone. The target must
attempt a Fortitude save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target is slowed 1 for 1 round.
Failure The target is slowed 1 and must attempt a Fortitude
save at the end of each of its turns; this ongoing save has
the incapacitation trait. On a failed save, the slowed condition
increases by 1 (or 2 on a critical failure). A successful save
reduces the slowed condition by 1. When a creature is unable
to act due to the slowed condition from flesh to stone, the
creature is petrified permanently. The spell ends if the
creature is petrified or the slowed condition is removed.
Critical Failure As failure, but the target is initially slowed 2.
FLOATING DISK SPELL 1
CONJURATION FORCE
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 8 hours
A disk of magical force materializes adjacent to you. This
disk is 2 feet in diameter and follows 5 feet behind you,
floating just above the ground. It holds up to 5  Bulk of
objects (though they must be able to fit and balance on its
surface). Any objects atop the disk fall to the ground when
the spell ends.
The spell ends if a creature tries to ride atop the disk, if
the disk is overloaded, if anyone tries to lift or force the disk
higher above the ground, or if you move more than 30 feet
away from the disk.
FLY SPELL 4
TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Duration 5 minutes
The target can soar through the air, gaining a fly Speed equal
to its Speed or 20 feet, whichever is greater.
Heightened (7th) The duration increases to 1 hour.
FORBIDDING WARD CANTRIP 1
ABJURATION CANTRIP
Traditions divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 ally and 1 enemy
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You ward an ally against the attacks and hostile spells from
the target enemy. The target ally gains a +1 status bonus to
339
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Armor Class and saving throws against the target enemy’s
attacks, spells, and other effects.
Heightened (6th) The status bonus increases to +2.
FORESIGHT SPELL 9
DIVINATION MENTAL PREDICTION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Duration 1 hour
You gain a sixth sense that warns you of danger that might
befall the target of the spell. If you choose a creature other
than yourself as the target, you create a psychic link through
which you can inform the target of danger. This link is a mental
effect. Due to the amount of information this spell requires
you to process, you can’t have more than one foresight spell
in effect at a time. Casting foresight again ends the previous
foresight. While foresight is in effect, the target gains a +2
status bonus to initiative rolls and isn’t flat-footed against
undetected creatures or when flanked. In addition, you gain
the following reaction.
Foresight [reaction] Trigger The target of foresight defends against
a hostile creature or other danger. Effect If the hostile
creature or danger forces the target to roll dice (a saving
throw, for example), the target rolls twice and uses the
higher result, and this spell gains the fortune trait. But if the
hostile creature or danger is rolling against the target (an
attack roll or skill check, for example), that hostile creature
or danger rolls twice and uses the lower result, and this
spell gains the misfortune trait.
FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT SPELL 4
ABJURATION
Traditions arcane, divine, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature touched
Duration 10 minutes
You repel effects that would hinder a creature or slow its
movement. While under this spell’s effect, the target ignores
effects that would give them a circumstance penalty to
Speed. When they attempt to Escape an effect that has them
immobilized, grabbed, or restrained, they automatically
succeed unless the effect is magical and of a higher level
than the freedom of movement spell.
GASEOUS FORM SPELL 4
POLYMORPH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 willing creature
Duration 5 minutes
The target transforms into a vaporous state. In this state,
the target is amorphous and loses any item bonus to AC.
It gains resistance 8 to physical damage and is immune to
precision damage. It can’t cast spells, activate items, or use
actions that have the attack or manipulate trait. It gains a fly
Speed of 10 feet and can slip through tiny cracks. The target
can Dismiss the spell.
GATE SPELL 10
UNCOMMON CONJURATION TELEPORTATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You tear open a rift to another plane, creating a portal that
creatures can travel through in either direction. This portal
is vertical and circular, with a radius of 40 feet. The portal
appears at a location of your choice on the destination plane,
assuming you have a clear idea of both the destination’s
location on the plane and what the destination looks like. If
you attempt to create a gate into or out of the realm of a deity
or another powerful being, that being can prevent the gate
from forming.
GENTLE REPOSE SPELL 2
NECROMANCY
Traditions arcane, divine, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 corpse
Duration until the next time you make your daily preparations
The targeted corpse doesn’t decay, nor can it be transformed
into an undead. If the corpse is subject to a spell that requires
the corpse to have died within a certain amount of time (for
example, raise dead), do not count the duration of gentle
repose against that time. This spell also prevents ordinary
bugs and pests (such as maggots) from consuming the body.
Heightened (5th) The spell’s duration is unlimited, but the
spell takes one more action to cast and requires a material
component and a cost (embalming fluid worth 6 gp).
GHOST SOUND CANTRIP 1
AUDITORY CANTRIP ILLUSION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet
Duration sustained
You create an auditory illusion of simple sounds that has a
maximum volume equal to four normal humans shouting.
The sounds emanate from a square you designate within
range. You can’t create intelligible words or other intricate
sounds (such as music).
Heightened (3rd) The range increases to 60 feet.
Heightened (5th) The range increases to 120 feet.
GHOSTLY WEAPON SPELL 3
TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 non-magical weapon that is either
unattended or wielded by you or a willing ally
Duration 5 minutes
Core Rulebook
340
The target weapon becomes translucent and ghostly, and it
can affect material and incorporeal creatures and objects. It
can be wielded by a corporeal or incorporeal creature and
gains the effects of the ghost touch property rune.
GHOULISH CRAVINGS SPELL 2
ATTACK DISEASE EVIL NECROMANCY
Traditions divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Fortitude
You touch the target to afflict it with ghoul fever, infesting it
with hunger and a steadily decreasing connection to positive
energy; the target must attempt a Fortitude save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target is afflicted with ghoul fever at stage 1.
Failure The target is afflicted with ghoul fever at stage 2.
Critical Failure The target is afflicted with ghoul fever at stage 3.
Ghoul Fever (disease); Level 3; Stage 1 carrier with no ill
effects (1 day); Stage 2 3d8 negative damage and the
creature regains half as many Hit Points from all healing
(1 day); Stage 3 as stage 2 (1 day); Stage 4 3d8 negative
damage and the creature gains no benefit from healing (1
day); Stage 5 as stage 4 (1 day); Stage 6 the creature dies
and rises as a ghoul at the next midnight
GLIBNESS SPELL 4
UNCOMMON ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Traditions occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 10 minutes
Falsehoods pass your lips as smoothly as silk. You gain a +4
status bonus to Deception checks to Lie and against Perception
checks to discern if you are telling the truth, and you add your
level even if you’re untrained. If the implausibility of your lies
prompts a circumstance penalty or a DC increase, reduce that
penalty or increase by half.
GLITTERDUST SPELL 2
EVOCATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Area 10-foot burst
Saving Throw Reflex
Creatures in the area are outlined by glittering dust. Each
creature must attempt a Reflex save. If a creature has its
invisibility negated by this spell, it is concealed instead of
invisible. This applies both if the creature was already invisible
and if it benefits from new invisibility effects before the end of
the invisibility negation effect from this spell.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target’s invisibility is negated for 2 rounds.
Failure The target is dazzled for 1 minute and its invisibility is
negated for 1 minute.
Critical Failure The target is blinded for 1 round and dazzled
for 10 minutes. Its invisibility is negated for 10 minutes.
GLOBE OF INVULNERABILITY SPELL 4
UNCOMMON ABJURATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 10-foot burst centered on one corner of your space
Duration 10 minutes
You create an immobile globe around yourself that attempts
to counteract any spell from outside the globe whose area
or targets enter into the globe, as if the globe were a dispel
magic spell 1 level lower than its actual spell level. If the
counteract attempt succeeds, it prevents only the portion
of the spell that would have entered the globe (so if the
spell also has targets outside the globe, or part of its area
is beyond the globe, those targets or that area is affected
normally). You must form the sphere in an unbroken open
space, so its edges don’t pass through any creatures or
objects, or the spell is lost (though creatures can enter the
globe after the spell is cast).
GLYPH OF WARDING SPELL 3
ABJURATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult, primal
Cast 10 minutes (material, somatic, verbal)
Range touch; Targets 1 container or a 10-foot-by-10-foot area
Duration unlimited
You craft a trap by binding a hostile spell into a symbol. While
Casting this Spell, you also Cast a Spell of a lower spell level
to store in the glyph. The stored spell must take 3 actions or
fewer to cast, have a hostile effect, and target one creature
or have an area. You can set a password, a trigger, or both
for the glyph. Any creature that moves, opens, or touches the
target container or enters the target area that doesn’t speak
the password or that matches the trigger activates the glyph,
releasing the harmful spell within.
Once a spell is stored in the glyph, the glyph gains all the
traits of that spell. If the stored spell targets one or more
creatures, it targets the creature that set off the glyph. If it
has an area, that area is centered on the creature that set off
the glyph. Glyph of warding’s duration ends when the glyph
is triggered. The glyph counts as a magical trap, using your
spell DC for both the Perception check to notice it and the
Thievery check to disable it; both checks require the creature
attempting them to be trained in order to succeed.
You can Dismiss glyph of warding. The maximum number
of glyphs of warding you can have active at a time is equal to
your spellcasting ability modifier.
GOBLIN POX SPELL 1
ATTACK DISEASE NECROMANCY
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Fortitude
Your touch afflicts the target with goblin pox, an irritating
allergenic rash. The target must attempt a Fortitude save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
341
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Success The target is sickened 1.
Failure The target is afflicted with goblin pox at stage 1.
Critical Failure The target is afflicted with goblin pox at stage 2.
Goblin Pox (disease); Level 1. Goblins and goblin dogs are
immune. Stage 1 sickened 1 (1 round); Stage 2 sickened 1
and slowed 1 (1 round); Stage 3 sickened 1 and the creature
can’t reduce its sickened value below 1 (1 day)
GREASE SPELL 1
CONJURATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Area 4 contiguous 5-foot squares or
Targets 1 object of 1 Bulk or less
Duration 1 minute
You conjure grease, with effects based on choosing area or target.
• Area All solid ground in the area is covered with
grease. Each creature standing on the greasy surface
must succeed at a Reflex save or an Acrobatics check
against your spell DC or fall prone. Creatures using
an action to move onto the greasy surface during the
spell’s duration must attempt either a Reflex save or an
Acrobatics check to Balance. A creature that Steps or
Crawls doesn’t have to attempt a check or save.
• Target If you cast the spell on an unattended object,
anyone trying to pick up the object must succeed
at an Acrobatics check or Reflex save against your
spell DC to do so. If you target an attended object,
the creature that has the object must attempt an
Acrobatics check or Reflex save. On a failure, the
holder or wielder takes a –2 circumstance penalty to
all checks that involve using the object; on a critical
failure, the holder or wielder releases the item. The
object lands in an adjacent square of the GM’s choice.
If you cast this spell on a worn object, the wearer
gains a +2 circumstance bonus to Fortitude saves
against attempts to grapple them.
GRIM TENDRILS SPELL 1
NECROMANCY NEGATIVE
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 30-foot line
Saving Throw Fortitude
Tendrils of darkness curl out from your fingertips and
race through the air. You deal 2d4 negative damage and 1
persistent bleed damage to living creatures in the line. Each
living creature in the line must attempt a Fortitude save.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature takes half the negative damage and no
persistent bleed damage.
Failure The creature takes full damage.
Critical Failure The creature takes double negative damage
and double persistent bleed damage.
Heightened (+1) The negative damage increases by 2d4, and
the persistent bleed damage increases by 1.
GUIDANCE CANTRIP 1
CANTRIP DIVINATION
Traditions divine, occult, primal
Cast [one-action] verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Duration until the start of your next turn
You ask for divine guidance, granting the target a +1 status
bonus to one attack roll, Perception check, saving throw, or
skill check the target attempts before the duration ends. The
target chooses which roll to use the bonus on before rolling.
If the target uses the bonus, the spell ends. Either way, the
target is then temporarily immune for 1 hour.
GUST OF WIND SPELL 1
AIR EVOCATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 60-foot line
Duration until the start of your next turn
A violent wind issues forth from your palm, blowing from the
point where you are when you cast the spell to the line’s opposite
end. The wind extinguishes small non-magical fires, disperses
fog and mist, blows objects of light Bulk or less around, and
pushes larger objects. Large or smaller creatures in the area
must attempt a Fortitude save. Large or smaller creatures that
later move into the gust must attempt the save on entering.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature can’t move against the wind.
Failure The creature is knocked prone. If it was flying, it
suffers the effects of critical failure instead.
Critical Failure The creature is pushed 30 feet in the wind’s
direction, knocked prone, and takes 2d6 bludgeoning damage.
HALLUCINATION SPELL 5
ILLUSION INCAPACITATION MENTAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] material, somatic
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Duration 1 hour
The target consistently detects one thing as another, can’t
detect something that’s there, or detects something that’s not
there, though it doesn’t alter their beliefs. You choose which
of these effects applies, and you determine the specifics of the
hallucination. For example, you could make the target see all elves
as humans, be unable to detect the presence of their brother, see
their beloved pocket watch on their person even when it isn’t, or
see a tower in the center of town.
The target can attempt an initial Will save, with effects below.
They also receive a Will save to disbelieve the hallucination every
time they Seek or directly interact with the hallucination. For
example, the target could attempt to disbelieve the hallucination
each time they interacted with an elf, bumped into their brother
accidentally, tried to check their pocket watch, or studied
the tower. The target can attempt to disbelieve with a large
circumstance bonus in situations determined by the GM, such as
if the target attempted to climb the nonexistent tower.
Core Rulebook
342
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature perceives what you chose until it
disbelieves, but it knows what the hallucination is.
Failure The creature perceives what you chose until it disbelieves.
Critical Failure The creature perceives what you chose until
it disbelieves, and it trusts its false senses, taking a –4
circumstance penalty to saves to disbelieve.
Heightened (6th) Choose to either target up to 10 creatures
or change the spell’s duration to until the next time you make
your daily preparations.
Heightened (8th) Choose to either target any number of
creatures or change the spell’s duration to unlimited.
HALLUCINATORY TERRAIN SPELL 4
UNCOMMON ILLUSION
Traditions arcane, occult, primal
Cast 10 minutes (material, somatic, verbal)
Range 500 feet; Area 50-foot burst
Duration until the next time you make your daily preparations
You create an illusion that causes natural terrain to look,
sound, feel, and smell like a different kind of terrain. This
doesn’t disguise any structures or creatures in the area.
Any creature that touches the illusion or uses the Seek
action to examine it can attempt to disbelieve your illusion.
Heightened (5th) Your image can also disguise structures or
create illusory structures (but still doesn’t disguise creatures).
HARM SPELL 1
NECROMANCY NEGATIVE
Traditions divine
Cast [one-action] to [three-actions]
Range varies; Targets 1 living creature or 1 willing
undead creature
You channel negative energy to harm the living or heal
the undead. If the target is a living creature, you deal 1d8
negative damage to it, and it gets a basic Fortitude save.
If the target is a willing undead creature, you restore that
amount of Hit Points. The number of actions you spend when
Casting this Spell determines its targets, range, area, and
other parameters.
[one-action] (somatic) The spell has a range of touch.
[two-actions](verbal, somatic) The spell has a range of 30 feet. If you’re
healing an undead creature, increase the Hit Points restored
by 8.
[three-actions](material, verbal, somatic) You disperse positive energy
in a 30-foot emanation. This targets all living and undead
creatures in the area.
Heightened (+1) The amount of healing or damage increases by
1d8, and the extra healing for the 2-action version increases
by 8.
HASTE SPELL 3
TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Duration 1 minute
Magic empowers the target to act faster. It gains the quickened
condition and can use the extra action each round only for
Strike and Stride actions.
Heightened (7th) You can target up to 6 creatures.
HEAL SPELL 1
HEALING NECROMANCY POSITIVE
Traditions divine, primal
Cast [one-action] to [three-actions]
Range varies; Targets 1 willing living creature or 1 undead
creature
You channel positive energy to heal the living or damage
the undead. If the target is a willing living creature, you
restore 1d8 Hit Points. If the target is undead, you deal
that amount of positive damage to it, and it gets a basic
Fortitude save. The number of actions you spend when
Casting this Spell determines its targets, range, area, and
other parameters.
[one-action] (somatic) The spell has a range of touch.
[two-actions] (verbal, somatic) The spell has a range of 30 feet. If you’re
healing a living creature, increase the Hit Points restored
by 8.
[three-actions](material, somatic, verbal) You disperse positive energy
in a 30-foot emanation. This targets all living and undead
creatures in the burst.
Heightened (+1) The amount of healing or damage increases
by 1d8, and the extra healing for the 2-action version
increases by 8.
HEROISM SPELL 3
ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Traditions divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 humanoid creature
Duration 10 minutes
You tap into the target’s inner heroism, granting it a +1 status
bonus to attack rolls, Perception checks, saving throws, and
skill checks.
Heightened (6th) The status bonus increases to +2.
Heightened (9th) The status bonus increases to +3.
HIDEOUS LAUGHTER SPELL 2
EMOTION ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 living creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration sustained
The target is overtaken with uncontrollable laughter. It must
attempt a Will save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target is plagued with uncontrollable laugher. It
can’t use reactions.
Failure The target is slowed 1 and can’t use reactions.
Critical Failure The target falls prone and can’t use actions or
reactions for 1 round. It then suffers the failure effects.
343
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
HOLY CASCADE SPELL 4
EVOCATION GOOD POSITIVE WATER
Traditions divine
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal; Cost one vial of holy water (page 571)
Range 500 feet; Area 20-foot burst
Saving Throw basic Reflex
You call upon sacred energy to amplify a vial of holy water,
tossing it an incredible distance. It explodes in an enormous
burst that deals 3d6 bludgeoning damage to creatures in the
area from the cascade of water. The water deals an additional
6d6 positive damage to undead and 6d6 good damage to fiends.
Heightened (+1) The bludgeoning damage increases by 1d6, and
the additional positive and good damage each increase by 2d6.
HORRID WILTING SPELL 8
NECROMANCY NEGATIVE
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 500 feet; Targets any number of living creatures
Saving Throw basic Fortitude
You pull the moisture from the targets’ bodies, dealing
10d10 negative damage. Creatures made of water (such as
water elementals) and plant creatures use the outcome for
one degree of success worse than the result of their saving
throw. Creatures whose bodies contain no significant moisture
(such as earth elementals) are immune to horrid wilting.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d10.
HUMANOID FORM SPELL 2
POLYMORPH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 10 minutes
You transform your appearance to that of a Small or Medium
humanoid, such as a dwarf, elf, goblin, halfling, human, orc,
or lizardfolk. You gain the humanoid trait in addition to your
other traits while in this form, as well as any trait related to the
creature’s kind (such as goblin or human). If this transformation
reduces your size, it reduces your reach accordingly (as the
shrink spell). This transformation doesn’t change your statistics
in any way, and you don’t gain any special abilities of the
humanoid form you assume. You can still wear and use your
gear, which changes size (if necessary) to match your new form.
If items leave your person, they return to their usual size.
Humanoid form grants you a +4 status bonus to Deception
checks to pass as a generic member of the chosen ancestry, and
you add your level even if you’re untrained, but you can’t make
yourself look like a specific person. If you want to Impersonate
an individual, you still need to create a disguise, though the GM
won’t factor in the difference in ancestry when determining the
DC of your Deception check. You can Dismiss this spell.
Heightened (3rd) You gain darkvision or low-light vision if the
form you assume has that ability.
Heightened (5th) You can take on the appearance of a Large
humanoid. If this increases your size, you gain the effects of
the enlarge spell.
HYDRAULIC PUSH SPELL 1
ATTACK EVOCATION WATER
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 60 feet; Targets 1 creature or object
You call forth a powerful blast of pressurized water that
bludgeons the target and knocks it back. Make a ranged spell
attack roll.
Critical Success The target takes 6d6 bludgeoning damage
and is knocked back 10 feet.
Success The target takes 3d6 bludgeoning damage and is
knocked back 5 feet.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d6.
HYDRAULIC TORRENT SPELL 4
EVOCATION WATER
Traditions primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 60-foot line
Saving Throw Fortitude
A swirling torrent of water manifests along a straight line,
battering those that are its path and possibly pushing them
away from you. The torrent deals 8d6 bludgeoning damage.
Each creature in the area must attempt a basic Fortitude save.
Creatures that fail the save are also knocked back 5 feet (10
feet on a critical failure).
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d6.
HYPERCOGNITION SPELL 3
DIVINATION
Traditions occult
Cast [one-action] verbal
You rapidly catalog and collate information relevant to
your current situation. You can instantly use up to 6 Recall
Knowledge actions as part of Casting this Spell. For these
actions, you can’t use any special abilities, reactions, or free
actions that trigger when you Recall Knowledge.
HYPNOTIC PATTERN SPELL 3
ILLUSION VISUAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] material, somatic
Range 120 feet; Area 10-foot burst
Saving Throw Will; Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You create a pattern of shifting colors that hovers in the air
in a geometric cloud. Creatures are dazzled while inside the
pattern. In addition, a creature must attempt a Will saving
throw if it is inside the pattern when you cast it, when it
enters the pattern, when it ends its turn within the pattern,
or if it uses a Seek or Interact action on the pattern. A
creature currently fascinated by the pattern doesn’t attempt
new saves.
Success The target is unaffected.
Failure The target is fascinated by the pattern.
Critical Failure The target is fascinated by the pattern. While
it remains fascinated, it can’t use reactions.
Core Rulebook
344
ILLUSORY CREATURE SPELL 2
AUDITORY ILLUSION VISUAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 500 feet
Duration sustained
You create an illusory image of a Large or smaller creature. It
generates the appropriate sounds, smells, and feels believable
to the touch. If you and the image are ever farther than 500
feet apart, the spell ends.
The image can’t speak, but you can use your actions to
speak through the creature, with the spell disguising your
voice as appropriate. You might need to attempt a Deception
or Performance check to mimic the creature, as determined
by the GM. This is especially likely if you’re trying to imitate a
specific person and engage with someone that person knows.
In combat, the illusion can use 2 actions per turn, which it
uses when you Sustain the Spell. It uses your spell attack roll
for attack rolls and your spell DC for its AC. Its saving throw
modifiers are equal to your spell DC – 10. It is substantial
enough that it can flank other creatures. If the image is hit by
an attack or fails a save, the spell ends.
The illusion can cause damage by making the target believe
the illusion’s attacks are real, but it cannot otherwise directly
affect the physical world. If the illusory creature hits with
a Strike, the target takes mental damage equal to 1d4 plus
your spellcasting ability modifier. This is a mental effect.
The illusion’s Strikes are nonlethal. If the damage doesn’t
correspond to the image of the monster—for example, if an
illusory Large dragon deals only 5 damage—the GM might
allow the target to attempt a Perception check to disbelieve
the spell as a free action. Any relevant resistances and
weaknesses apply if the target thinks they do, as judged
by the GM. For example, if the illusion wields a warhammer
and attacks a creature resistant to bludgeoning damage, the
creature would take less mental damage. However, illusory
damage does not deactivate regeneration or trigger other
effects that require a certain damage type. The GM should
track illusory damage dealt by the illusion.
Any creature that touches the image or uses the Seek
action to examine it can attempt to disbelieve your illusion.
When a creature disbelieves the illusion, it recovers from half
the damage it had taken from it (if any) and doesn’t take any
further damage from it.
Heightened (+1) The damage of the image’s Strikes increases
by 1d4, and the maximum size of creature you can create
increases by one (to a maximum of Gargantuan).
ILLUSORY DISGUISE SPELL 1
ILLUSION VISUAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 hour
You create an illusion that causes you to appear as another
creature of the same body shape, and with roughly similar height
(within 6 inches) and weight (within 50 pounds), as yourself.
The disguise is typically good enough to hide your identity,
but not to impersonate a specific individual. The spell doesn’t
change your voice, scent, or mannerisms. You can change the
appearance of your clothing and worn items, such as making
your armor look like a dress. Held items are unaffected, and any
worn item you remove returns to its true appearance.
Casting illusory disguise counts as setting up a disguise for
the Impersonate use of Deception; it ignores any circumstance
penalties you might take for disguising yourself as a dissimilar
creature, it gives you a +4 status bonus to Deception checks to
prevent others from seeing through your disguise, and you add
your level even if you’re untrained. You can Dismiss this spell.
Heightened (2nd) The spell also disguises your voice and
scent, and it gains the auditory trait.
Heightened (3rd) You can appear as any creature of the
same size, even a specific individual. You must have seen an
individual to take on their appearance. The spell also disguises
your voice and scent, and it gains the auditory trait.
ILLUSORY OBJECT SPELL 1
ILLUSION VISUAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 500 feet; Area 20-foot burst
Duration 10 minutes
You create an illusory visual image of a stationary object.
The entire image must fit within the spell’s area. The object
appears to animate naturally, but it doesn’t make sounds or
generate smells. For example, water would appear to pour
down an illusory waterfall, but it would be silent.
Any creature that touches the image or uses the Seek action
to examine it can attempt to disbelieve your illusion.
Heightened (2nd) Your image makes appropriate sounds,
generates normal smells, and feels right to the touch. The spell
gains the auditory trait. The duration increases to 1 hour.
Heightened (5th) As the 2nd-level version, but the duration
is unlimited.
ILLUSORY SCENE SPELL 5
AUDITORY ILLUSION VISUAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast 10 minutes (somatic, verbal)
Range 500 feet; Area 30-foot burst
Duration 1 hour
You form an imaginary scene that includes up to 10 discrete
creatures or objects of various sizes, all of which must be
within the spell’s area. These elements generate appropriate
sounds and smells, and they feel right to the touch. Elements
of an illusory scene are incapable of speech. Unlike with the
illusory creature spell, creatures in your scene lack combat
abilities and statistics. Your scene doesn’t include changes to
the environment around it, though you can place your scene
within the illusory environment of a hallucinatory terrain spell.
When you create the scene, you can choose to have it be
static or follow a program. Though a static scene is stationary, it
includes basic natural movement. For example, wind blowing on
345
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
an illusory piece of paper would rustle it. A program can be up to
1 minute long and repeats when finished. For instance, you could
create a scene of two orcs fighting each other, and the fight would
go the same way for each repetition. If you create a loop, the two
fighters end up in the same place at the start of the scene and at
the end of it, but you can smooth the program so it’s hard to tell
when the loop ends and begins. Anyone observing the scene for
more than a few minutes almost always notices it looping. You’re
unable to alter the program after you create the illusion.
Any creature that touches any part of the image or uses
the Seek action to examine it can attempt to disbelieve your
illusion. If they interact with a portion of the illusion, they
disbelieve only that portion. They disbelieve the entire scene
only on a critical success.
Heightened (6th) Creatures or objects in your scene can speak.
You must speak the specific lines for each actor when creating
your program. The spell disguises your voice for each actor.
Heightened (8th) As the 6th-level version, and the duration
is unlimited.
IMPLOSION SPELL 9
EVOCATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 corporeal creature
Saving Throw basic Fortitude; Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You crush the target by causing it to collapse in on itself, dealing
75 damage. Each time you Sustain the Spell, you must choose a
new target to be subject to the same effect; the same creature
can never be targeted more than once with a single casting of
this spell. You also can’t affect more than one creature per turn
with implosion. You can’t target a creature that’s incorporeal,
gaseous, or liquid, or one that otherwise lacks a solid form.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 10.
INSECT FORM SPELL 3
POLYMORPH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
You envision a simple bug and transform into a Medium animal
battle form. When you cast this spell, choose ant, beetle,
centipede, mantis, scorpion, or spider. You can decide the specific
type of animal (such as such as a ladybug or scarab for beetle),
but this has no effect on the form’s Size or statistics. While in
this form, you gain the animal trait. You can Dismiss this spell.
You gain the following statistics and abilities regardless of
which battle form you choose:
• AC = 18 + your level. Ignore your armor’s check penalty
and Speed reduction.
• 10 temporary Hit Points.
• Low-light vision.
Core Rulebook
346
• One or more attacks specific to the battle form you
choose, which are the only attacks you can use. You’re
trained with them. Your attack modifier is +13, and your
damage bonus is +2. These attacks are Strength based
(for the purpose of the enfeebled condition). If your
unarmed attack modifier is higher, you can use it instead.
• Athletics modifier of +13, unless your own is higher.
You also gain specific abilities based on the form you choose:
• Ant Speed 30 feet, climb Speed 30 feet; Melee [one-action]
mandibles, Damage 2d6 bludgeoning.
• Beetle Speed 25 feet; Melee [one-action] mandibles, Damage
2d10 bludgeoning.
• Centipede Speed 25 feet, climb Speed 25 feet;
darkvision; Melee [one-action] mandibles, Damage 1d8 piercing
plus 1d4 persistent poison.
• Mantis Speed 40 feet; imprecise scent 30 feet; Melee
[one-action] foreleg, Damage 2d8 bludgeoning.
• Scorpion Speed 40 feet; darkvision, imprecise
tremorsense 60 feet; Melee [one-action] stinger, Damage 1d8
piercing plus 1d4 persistent poison; Melee [one-action] pincer
(agile), Damage 1d6 bludgeoning.
• Spider darkvision; Melee [one-action] fangs, Damage 1d6 piercing
plus 1d4 persistent poison; Melee [one-action]Speed 25 feet, climb
Speed 25 feet; Ranged [one-action]web (range increment 20 feet),
Damage entangles the target for 1 round.
Heightened (4th) Your battle form is Large, and your attacks
have 10-foot reach. You must have enough space to expand
into or the spell is lost. You instead gain 15 temporary HP,
attack modifier +16, damage bonus +6, and Athletics +16.
Heightened (5th) Your battle form is Huge, and your attacks
have 15-foot reach. You must have enough space to expand
into or the spell is lost. You instead gain 20 temporary HP,
attack modifier +18, damage bonus +2 and double damage
dice (including persistent damage), and Athletics +20.
INVISIBILITY SPELL 2
ILLUSION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] material, somatic
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Duration 10 minutes
Cloaked in illusion, the target becomes invisible. This makes it
undetected to all creatures, though the creatures can attempt
to find the target, making it hidden to them instead (page
466). If the target uses a hostile action, the spell ends after
that hostile action is completed.
Heightened (4th) The spell lasts 1 minute, but it doesn’t end if
the target uses a hostile action.
INVISIBILITY SPHERE SPELL 3
ILLUSION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] material, somatic
Area 10-foot emanation; Targets you and any number of
creatures in range
Duration 10 minutes
You and all targets are invisible except to each other as long as
you remain within the spell’s area. If a creature made invisible
by this spell leaves the spell’s area, it becomes visible and
remains so even if it returns to the spell’s area. If any creature
made invisible by this spell uses a hostile action, the spell ends
after the hostile action is completed.
While exploring, it’s easy to move together slowly and
remain invisible. This is untenable in a battle, however. Once
an encounter begins, creatures remain invisible until at most
the end of the first round, at which point the spell ends.
Heightened (5th) The duration increases to 1 hour.
ITEM FACADE SPELL 1
ILLUSION VISUAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 object no more than 10 feet by 10 feet
by 10 feet
Duration 1 hour
You make the target object look and feel as though it were
in much better or worse physical condition. When you cast
this spell, decide whether you want to make the object look
decrepit or perfect. An item made to look decrepit appears
broken and shoddy. An intact item made to look better
appears as though it’s brand new and highly polished or well
maintained. A broken item appears to be intact and functional.
Destroyed items can’t be affected by this spell. A creature that
Interacts with the item can attempt to disbelieve the illusion.
Heightened (2nd) The duration is 24 hours.
Heightened (3rd) The duration is unlimited.
JUMP SPELL 1
MOVE TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast [one-action] somatic
Your legs surge with strength, ready to leap high and far. You
jump 30 feet in any direction without touching the ground. You
must land on a space of solid ground within 30 feet of you, or
else you fall after using your next action.
Heightened (3rd) The range becomes touch, the target
changes to one touched creature, and the duration becomes
1 minute, allowing the target to jump as described whenever
it takes the Leap action.
KNOCK SPELL 2
TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 door, lock, or container
Duration 1 minute
You make the target easier to open. Knock grants a +4 status
bonus to any creature that tries to open the target door, lock, or
container with an Athletics or a Thievery check. You can attempt
a Thievery check to open the target as part of casting knock, and
you add your level even if you’re untrained.
Knock counteracts lock.
347
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
KNOW DIRECTION CANTRIP 1
CANTRIP DETECTION DIVINATION
Traditions divine, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
In your mind’s eye, you see a path northward. You immediately
know which direction is north (if it exists at your current location).
Heightened (7th) You can instead know the direction to a
familiar location, such as a previous home or a favorite tavern.
LEVITATE SPELL 3
EVOCATION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 unattended object or willing creature
Duration 5 minutes
You defy gravity and levitate the target 5 feet off the ground.
For the duration of the spell, you can move the target up or
down 10 feet with a single action, which has the concentrate
trait. A creature floating in the air from levitate takes a –2
circumstance penalty to attack rolls. A floating creature can
spend an Interact action to stabilize itself and negate this
penalty for the remainder of its turn. If the target is adjacent to
a fixed object or terrain of suitable stability, it can move across
the surface by climbing (if the surface is vertical, like a wall) or
crawling (if the surface is horizontal, such as a ceiling). The GM
determines which surfaces can be climbed or crawled across.
LIGHT CANTRIP 1
CANTRIP EVOCATION LIGHT
Traditions arcane, divine, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 unattended, non-magical object of 1
Bulk or less
Duration until the next time you make your daily preparations
The object glows, casting bright light in a 20-foot radius (and
dim light for the next 20 feet) like a torch. If you cast this spell
again on a second object, the light spell on the first object ends.
Heightened (4th) The object sheds bright light in a 60-foot
radius (and dim light for the next 60 feet).
LIGHTNING BOLT SPELL 3
ELECTRICITY EVOCATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 120-foot line
Saving Throw basic Reflex
A bolt of lightning strikes outward from your hand, dealing
4d12 electricity damage.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d12.
LOCATE SPELL 3
UNCOMMON DETECTION DIVINATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast 10 minutes (material, somatic, verbal)
Range 500 feet; Targets 1 specific object or type of object
Duration sustained
You learn the direction to the target (if you picked a specific
object, such as “my mother’s sword”) or the nearest target (if
you picked a type of object, such as “swords”). If the target is
a specific object, you must have observed it directly with your
own senses. If it’s a type of object, you still need to have an
accurate mental image of the type of object. If there’s lead or
running water between you and the target, this spell can’t
locate the object. This means you might find a type of object
farther away if the nearest one is behind lead or running water.
Heightened (5th) You can target a specific creature or ancestry
instead of an object, but you must have met or seen up close
the creature or ancestry you want to target.
LOCK SPELL 1
ABJURATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 lock, or a door or container with a latch
Duration 1 day
The target’s latch mechanism clinks shut, held fast by unseen
magical restraints. When you magically lock a target, you set
an Athletics and Thievery DC to open it equal to your spell DC
or the base lock DC with a +4 status bonus, whichever is higher.
Any key or combination that once opened a lock affected by
this spell does not do so for the duration of the spell, though
the key or combination does grant a +4 circumstance bonus to
checks to open the door.
If the target is opened, the spell ends. Assuming the target
is not barred or locked in some additional way, you can unlock
and open it with an Interact action during which you touch the
target. This does not end the spell. You can Dismiss this spell
at any time and from any distance.
Heightened (2nd) The duration increases to unlimited, but you
must expend 6 gp worth of gold dust as an additional cost.
LONGSTRIDER SPELL 1
TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 hour
You lengthen your stride beyond what should be possible. You
gain a +10-foot status bonus to your Speed.
Heightened (2nd) The duration increases to 8 hours.
MAGE ARMOR SPELL 1
ABJURATION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration until the next time you make your daily preparations
You ward yourself with shimmering magical energy, gaining
a +1 item bonus to AC and a maximum Dexterity modifier
of +5. While wearing mage armor, you use your unarmored
proficiency to calculate your AC.
Heightened (4th) You gain a +1 item bonus to saving throws.
Heightened (6th) The item bonus to AC increases to +2, and
you gain a +1 item bonus to saving throws.
Core Rulebook
348
Heightened (8th) The item bonus to AC increases to +2, and
you gain a +2 item bonus to saving throws.
Heightened (10th) The item bonus to AC increases to +3, and
you gain a +3 item bonus to saving throws.
MAGE HAND CANTRIP 1
CANTRIP EVOCATION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 unattended object of light Bulk or less
Duration sustained
You create a single magical hand, either invisible or ghostlike,
that grasps the target object and moves it slowly up to 20
feet. Because you’re levitating the object, you can move it in
any direction. When you Sustain the Spell, you can move the
object an additional 20 feet. If the object is in the air when the
spell ends, the object falls.
Heightened (3rd) You can target an unattended object with a
Bulk of 1 or less.
Heightened (5th) The range increases to 60 feet, and you can
target an unattended object with a Bulk of 1 or less.
Heightened (7th) The range increases to 60 feet, and you can
target an unattended object with a Bulk of 2 or less.
MAGIC AURA SPELL 1
UNCOMMON ILLUSION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast 1 minute (material, somatic, verbal)
Range touch; Targets 1 object of 3 bulk or less
Duration until the next time you make your daily preparations
You alter the appearance of an item’s magic aura. You can
choose to have the target’s aura appear as that of common
magic item of twice magic aura’s level or lower, or to have it
register as being under the effects of a spell of your choice
of magic aura’s level or lower. If the target is magical, you
can instead choose to have it appear as entirely non-magical.
A caster using detect magic or study aura of an equal or
higher spell level can attempt to disbelieve the illusion from
magic aura. Magic aura doesn’t mask the aura of spells that
are 9th level or higher or of items that are 19th level or higher.
Heightened (3rd) You can target a creature instead of an
object. When you do, you can either conceal the auras of all
magic items it has or have that creature’s aura appear as if it
were under the effect of a spell you know.
MAGIC FANG SPELL 1
TRANSMUTATION
Traditions primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 willing ally
Duration 1 minute
Choose one of the target’s unarmed attacks that deal one
damage die. You cause that unarmed attack to shine with
primal energy. The unarmed attack becomes a +1 striking
unarmed attack, gaining a +1 item bonus to attack rolls and
increasing the number of damage dice to two.
MAGIC MISSILE SPELL 1
EVOCATION FORCE
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast [one-action] to [three-actions] (somatic, verbal)
Range 120 feet; Targets 1 creature
You send a dart of force streaking toward a creature that
you can see. It automatically hits and deals 1d4+1 force
damage. For each additional action you use when Casting
the Spell, increase the number of missiles you shoot by one,
to a maximum of three missiles for 3 actions. You choose
the target for each missile individually. If you shoot more
than one missile at the same target, combine the damage
before applying bonuses or penalties to damage, resistances,
weaknesses, and so forth.
Heightened (+2) You shoot one additional missile with each
action you spend.
MAGIC MOUTH SPELL 2
AUDITORY ILLUSION VISUAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature or object
Duration unlimited
You specify a trigger (described on page 305) and a message
up to 25 words long. When the specified trigger occurs
within 30 feet of the target, an illusory mouth appears on
the target and speaks the message, and the magic mouth
spell ends.
MAGIC WEAPON SPELL 1
TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 non-magical weapon that is unattended
or wielded by you or a willing ally
Duration 1 minute
The weapon glimmers with magic and energy. The target
becomes a +1 striking weapon, gaining a +1 item bonus to
attack rolls and increasing the number of weapon damage
dice to two.
MAGNIFICENT MANSION SPELL 7
UNCOMMON CONJURATION EXTRADIMENSIONAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast 1 minute (material, somatic, verbal)
Range 30 feet
Duration 24 hours
You conjure an extradimensional demiplane consisting of
a spacious dwelling with a single entrance. The entrance
connects to the plane where you Cast the Spell, appearing
anywhere within the spell’s range as a faint, shimmering,
vertical rectangle 5 feet wide and 10 feet high. You designate
who can enter when you cast the spell. Once inside, you can
shut the entrance, making it invisible. You and the creatures
you designated can reopen the door at will, just like opening
a physical door.
349
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Inside, the demiplane appears to be a mansion featuring
a magnificent foyer and numerous opulent chambers. The
mansion can have any floor plan you imagine as you Cast
the Spell, provided it fits within a space 40 feet wide, 40 feet
deep, and 30 feet tall. While the entrance to the mansion is
closed, effects from outside the mansion fail to penetrate it,
and vice versa, except for plane shift, which can be used to
enter the mansion. You can use scrying magic and similar
effects to observe the outside only if they’re capable of
crossing planes.
A staff of up to 24 servants attends to anyone within the
mansion. These are like the servant created by the unseen
servant spell, though they’re visible, with an appearance
you determine during casting. The mansion is stocked with
enough food to serve a nine-course banquet to 150 people.
MARINER’S CURSE SPELL 5
ATTACK CURSE NECROMANCY
Traditions arcane, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will
You afflict the target with the curse of the roiling, unforgiving
sea. The target must attempt a Will save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target becomes sickened 1. Reducing its sickened
condition to 0 ends the curse.
Failure The target becomes sickened 1 and can’t reduce
its sickened condition below 1 while the curse remains.
The curse can be lifted by remove curse or similar magic.
Whenever the target is sickened and on the water at least a
mile from shore, it is also slowed 1.
Critical Failure As failure, but the target becomes sickened 2.
MASK OF TERROR SPELL 7
EMOTION FEAR ILLUSION MENTAL VISUAL
Traditions arcane, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Duration 1 minute
The target appears to be a gruesome and terrifying creature.
The effect is unique to each observer, so a human viewing the
target might see a demon with bloody fangs, but a demon
observing the target might see a glowing angelic visage.
When any creature attempts a hostile action against the
target, the creature must attempt a Will save. It is then
temporarily immune until the end of its next turn.
Success The creature is unaffected.
Failure The creature becomes frightened 2 before using
its action.
Critical Failure The creature becomes frightened 2, and its
action fails and is wasted.
Heightened (8th) You can target up to 5 creatures. If a creature
uses a hostile action or reaction that affects multiple targets
simultaneously, it needs to attempt only one save against
mask of terror.
MASSACRE SPELL 9
DEATH NECROMANCY NEGATIVE
Traditions arcane, divine, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 60-foot line
Saving Throw Fortitude
You unleash a wave of necromantic energy to snuff out the
life force of those in its path. Each creature of 17th level
or lower in the line must attempt a Fortitude save. If the
damage from massacre reduces a creature to 0 Hit Points,
that creature dies instantly. If massacre doesn’t kill even a
single creature, the negative energy violently explodes back
toward you, dealing an additional 30 negative damage to
every creature in the line (even those above 17th level) and
30 negative damage to you.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature takes 9d6 negative damage.
Failure The creature takes 100 negative damage.
Critical Failure The creature dies.
Heightened (10th) The spell can affect creatures up to 19th
level. Increase the damage to 10d6 on a success, and to 115
on a failure.
MAZE SPELL 8
CONJURATION EXTRADIMENSIONAL TELEPORTATION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Duration sustained
You transport the target into an extradimensional maze of
eldritch origin and trap it there. Once each turn, the target
can spend 1 action to attempt a Survival check or Perception
check against your spell DC to escape the maze. The possible
outcomes are as follows.
Critical Success The target escapes and the spell ends.
Success The target is on the right path to the exit. If the target
was already on the right path, it escapes the maze and the
spell ends.
Failure The target makes no progress toward escape.
Critical Failure The target makes no progress toward escape,
and if it was on the right path, it no longer is.
Teleportation magic doesn’t help the creature escape unless
the magic can transport across planes, such as plane shift.
When the spell ends, either because the target escaped or the
duration ran out, the target returns to the space it occupied
when it was banished, or to the nearest space if the original
is now filled.
MELD INTO STONE SPELL 3
EARTH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 10 minutes
You merge with an adjacent block of stone with enough
volume to fit you and your worn and held possessions. You
must touch the stone when you Cast the Spell. You can hear,
Core Rulebook
350
but not see, what’s going on outside the stone, and you can
cast spells while in the stone as long as they don’t require line
of effect beyond the stone.
Significant physical damage to the stone while you are
inside it expels you and deals 10d6 damage to you. Passwall
expels you without dealing damage and ends meld into stone.
You can Dismiss this spell.
MENDING SPELL 1
TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult, primal
Cast 10 minutes (somatic, verbal)
Range touch; Targets non-magical object of light Bulk or less
You repair the target item. You restore 5 Hit Points per spell level
to the target, potentially removing the broken condition if this
repairs it past the item’s Broken Threshold. You can’t replace lost
pieces or repair an object that’s been completely destroyed.
Heightened (2nd) You can target a non-magical object of 1
Bulk or less.
Heightened (3rd) You can target a non-magical object of 2
Bulk or less, or a magical object of 1 Bulk or less.
MESSAGE CANTRIP 1
AUDITORY CANTRIP ILLUSION LINGUISTIC MENTAL
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast [one-action] verbal
Range 120 feet; Targets 1 creature
Duration see below
You mouth words quietly, but instead of coming out of your
mouth, they’re transferred directly to the ears of the target.
While others can’t hear your words any better than if you
normally mouthed them, the target can hear your words as
if they were standing next to you. The target can give a brief
response as a reaction, or as a free action on their next turn
if they wish, but they must be able to see you and be within
range to do so. If they respond, their response is delivered
directly to your ear, just like the original message.
Heightened (3rd) The spell’s range increases to 500 feet.
METEOR SWARM SPELL 9
EVOCATION FIRE
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 500 feet; Area 4 40-foot bursts
Saving Throw basic Reflex
You call down four meteors that explode in a fiery blast. Each
meteor deals 6d10 bludgeoning damage to any creatures in
the 10-foot burst at the center of its area of effect before
exploding, dealing 14d6 fire damage to any creatures in
its 40-foot burst. The meteors’ central 10-foot bursts can’t
overlap, and a creature takes the same amount of fire
damage no matter how many overlapping explosions it’s
caught in. The saving throw applies to both the bludgeoning
and the fire damage.
Heightened (+1) The bludgeoning damage increases by 1d10,
and the fire damage increases by 2d6.
MIND BLANK SPELL 8
UNCOMMON ABJURATION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Duration until the next time you make your daily preparations
Powerful wards hide a creature from divination magic. The
target gains a +4 status bonus to saves against mental effects.
Mind blank attempts to counteract any detection, revelation,
and scrying effects as if its spell level were 1 higher than its
actual level. On a success, the divination effect functions
normally except that it detects nothing about the target and
its possessions. For instance, detect magic would still detect
other magic in the area, but not any magic on the target.
MIND PROBE SPELL 5
UNCOMMON DIVINATION LINGUISTIC MENTAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast 1 minute (material, somatic, verbal)
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You cast your thoughts through a creature’s mind, sifting for
information. You access the target’s memories and knowledge
unless it fends you off with a Will save.
Success The target is unaffected.
Failure Each round of the spell’s duration, you can Sustain the
Spell to ask a different question and attempt to uncover
the answer. For each question, the target can attempt
a Deception check against your spell DC; if the target
succeeds, you don’t learn the answer, and on a critical
success, the target gives you a false answer that you believe
is truthful Once you’ve asked the target a given question,
asking it again, even with a separate casting of mind probe,
produces the same result.
Critical Failure As failure, and the target takes a –4 circumstance
penalty to Deception checks against your questions.
MIND READING SPELL 3
UNCOMMON DETECTION DIVINATION MENTAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration 1 round or sustained up to 1 minute
With a cursory mental touch, you attempt to read the target’s
mind. It must attempt a Will save. The target then becomes
temporarily immune to your mind reading for 1 hour.
Critical Success The target perceives vague surface thoughts
from you when you Cast the Spell.
Success You find out whether the target’s Intelligence modifier
is higher than, equal to, or lower than yours.
Failure You perceive vague surface thoughts from the target when
you Cast the Spell, and you find out whether its Intelligence
modifier is higher than, equal to, or lower than yours.
Critical Failure As failure, and for the duration of the spell, you
can Sustain the Spell to detect the target’s surface thoughts
again. The target doesn’t receive any additional saves.
351
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
MINDLINK SPELL 1
DIVINATION MENTAL
Traditions occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 willing creature
You link your mind to the target’s mind and mentally impart to
that target an amount of information in an instant that could
otherwise be communicated in 10 minutes.
MIRACLE SPELL 10
DIVINATION
Traditions divine
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
You request aid directly from your divine source. Your divine
source always refuses a request out of line with its nature, and
it might grant a different request (potentially more powerful or
better fitting its nature) than the one you asked for. A casting
of miracle can do any of the following things.
• Duplicate any divine spell of 9th level or lower.
• Duplicate any non-divine spell of 7th level or lower.
• Produce any effect whose power level is in line with
the above effects.
• Reverse certain effects that refer to the wish spell.
The GM might allow you to try using miracle to produce
greater effects than these, but doing so may be dangerous, or
the spell may have only a partial effect.
MIRROR IMAGE SPELL 2
ILLUSION VISUAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
Three illusory images of you swirl about your space, potentially
causing those who attack you to hit one of the images instead
of you. Any attack that would hit you has a random chance of
hitting one of your images instead of you. If all three images
remain, there is a 1 in 4 chance of hitting you (1 on 1d4). With
two images remaining, there is a 1 in 3 chance of hitting you (1–2
on 1d6). With only one image, the chances are 1 in 2 (1–3 on 1d6).
Once an image is hit, it is destroyed. If an attack roll fails
to hit your AC but doesn’t critically fail, it destroys an image
but has no additional effect (even if the attack would normally
have an effect on a failure). If an attack roll is a critical
success and would hit one of the images, one of the images is
destroyed and the attack roll becomes a success against you.
Once all the images are destroyed, the spell ends.
MISDIRECTION SPELL 2
ILLUSION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast 1 minute (somatic, verbal)
Range 30 feet; Targets 2 creatures or objects
Duration until the next time you make your daily preparations
You reshape the magic aura of one creature or object to
resemble that of another. You designate one target as
the primary target and the other as the secondary target.
Effects that would detect auras on the primary target instead
detect the same types of auras from the secondary target.
A creature reading the aura can attempt to disbelieve the
illusion. You can Dismiss the spell from up to a mile away.
MISLEAD SPELL 6
ILLUSION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You turn yourself invisible and create an illusory duplicate of
yourself. When you Sustain the Spell, you can mentally dictate
a course of action for your duplicate to follow that round. Your
duplicate acts as though it had your full number of actions,
though it can’t actually affect anything in the environment.
Both the duplicate and your invisibility persist for the spell’s
duration. Performing a hostile action doesn’t end mislead’s
invisibility, just like a 4th-level invisibility spell. A creature
that determines the duplicate is an illusion doesn’t necessarily
know you’re invisible, and one that can see your invisible form
doesn’t necessarily know your duplicate is an illusion.
If you Cast a Spell, attack, or otherwise interact with
another creature, as a part of that action you can attempt
a Deception check against observers’ Perception DCs to
convince them your duplicate used that action. This doesn’t
fool anyone who’s aware your duplicate is an illusion, nor does
it work if the attack obviously couldn’t have come from the
duplicate. For instance, if you fired a ray, you could make it
look like it came from the duplicate as long as the duplicate
was positioned appropriately, but if you attacked with a sword
and your duplicate was across the room from the target, your
Deception check would automatically fail.
MODIFY MEMORY SPELL 4
UNCOMMON DIVINATION MENTAL
Traditions occult
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration unlimited
You alter the target’s memories, either erasing a memory,
enhancing a memory’s clarity, altering a memory, or adding
a false memory. The target can attempt a Will save to resist
the spell.
Critical Success The target is unaffected and realizes you tried
to alter its memory.
Success The target is unaffected but thinks your spell was
something harmless instead of modify memory, unless it
identifies the spell.
Failure During the first 5 minutes of the spell’s duration,
you can Sustain the Spell to modify a memory once each
round. When you do, you imagine up to 6 seconds of
memory to modify, to a maximum of 5 continuous minutes
of memory.
Any memories you’ve altered remain changed as long as the
spell is active. If the target moves out of range before the 5
minutes is up, you can’t alter any further memories.
Core Rulebook
352
Heightened (6th) You can cast the spell on a willing target
to suppress all memory of a particular topic, detailed in 50
words or fewer. The effect is permanent, and it patches these
omissions with an indistinct haze.
MOMENT OF RENEWAL SPELL 8
HEALING NECROMANCY
Traditions divine, primal
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets up to 6 creatures
The targets experience a day’s worth of recovery in an instant.
Any detrimental effects that would be gone after 24 hours
end, though this doesn’t shorten the duration of any active
spells affecting the targets. The targets regain Hit Points and
recover from conditions as if they had taken 24 hours of rest,
but they do not make their daily preparations again or gain
any benefits of rest other than healing. The targets are then
temporarily immune for 1 day.
MONSTROSITY FORM SPELL 8
POLYMORPH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
You transform into the shape of a legendary monster,
assuming a Huge battle form. You must have enough space
to expand into or the spell is lost. When you cast this spell,
choose phoenix, purple worm, or sea serpent. While in this
form, you gain the beast trait (for phoenix) or the animal trait
(for purple worm or sea serpent). You can Dismiss the spell.
You gain the following statistics and abilities regardless of
which battle form you choose:
• AC = 20 + your level. Ignore your armor’s check penalty
and Speed reduction.
• 20 temporary Hit Points.
• Darkvision.
• One or more unarmed melee attacks specific to the
battle form you choose, which are the only attacks
you can use. You’re trained with them. Your attack
modifier is +28, and you use the listed damage. These
attacks are Strength based (for the purpose of the
enfeebled condition, for example). If your unarmed
attack modifier is higher, you can use it instead.
• Athletics modifier of +30, unless your own modifier
is higher.
You also gain specific abilities based on the type of monster
you choose:
• Phoenix Speed 30 feet, fly Speed 90 feet; Melee [one‑action]
beak (reach 15 feet), Damage 2d6+12 piercing plus
2d4 fire and 2d4 persistent fire; Melee [one‑action] talon (agile,
reach 15 feet), Damage 2d8+12 slashing; Shroud of
Flame (aura, evocation, fire, primal) 20 feet. You gain
an aura of fire that extends out from you. A creature
that enters or ends its turn within the aura takes 2d6
fire damage. A creature can take this damage only
once per turn. You can use a single action, which
has the concentrate trait, to activate or deactivate
this aura.
• Purple Worm Speed 40 feet, burrow Speed 30 feet,
swim Speed 20 feet; Melee [one‑action] jaws (reach 10 feet),
Damage 2d12+20 piercing; Melee [one‑action] stinger (agile,
reach 10 feet), Damage 2d8+15 piercing plus 2d6
persistent poison; Melee [one‑action] body (reach 10 feet)
Damage 2d8+20 bludgeoning; Inexorable You
automatically recover from the paralyzed, slowed, and
stunned conditions at the end of each of your turns.
You’re also immune to being immobilized and ignore
difficult terrain and greater difficult terrain.
• Sea Serpent Speed 20 feet, swim Speed 90 feet; Melee
[one‑action] jaws (reach 15 feet), Damage 2d12+20 piercing;
Melee [one‑action] tail (reach 25 feet), Damage 2d8+20
bludgeoning; Spine Rake [two‑actions] (move) You extend
your spines and Swim or Stride. Each creature you’re
adjacent to at any point during your movement takes
4d8+10 slashing damage (basic Reflex against your
spell DC).
Heightened (9th) You instead gain AC = 22 + your level, 25
temporary HP, attack modifier +31, increase damage by one
damage die, and Athletics +33.
MOON FRENZY SPELL 5
MORPH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions primal
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets up to 5 willing creatures
Duration 1 minute
A feral aspect overcomes the targets, making them tough and
savage. Targets gain 5 temporary Hit Points, a +10-foot status
bonus to their Speeds, and weakness 5 to silver. They also
grow vicious fangs and claws, which are unarmed attacks. The
fangs deal 2d8 piercing damage; the claws deal 2d6 slashing
damage and have the agile and finesse traits. The targets
use their highest weapon or unarmed attack proficiency
with these attacks, and if they have weapon specialization
or greater weapon specialization, they add this damage as
well. On a critical hit with one of these unarmed attacks, the
creature struck takes 1d4 persistent bleed damage.
The targets can’t use concentrate actions unless those
actions also have the rage trait, with the exception of Seek. A
creature can attempt to end the spell’s effect on itself by using
a single action, which has the rage trait, to attempt a Will save
against your spell DC; on a success, it ends the spell’s effect
on itself.
If a target is in the light of a full moon, it also grows by one
size if it were Medium or smaller. This increases the reach of a
Medium or Tiny creature by 5 feet.
Heightened (6th) The temporary Hit Points increase to 10, the
silver weakness to 10, and the damage dealt by the attacks to
three dice.
Heightened (10th) The temporary Hit Points increase to 20,
the silver weakness to 20, and the damage dealt by the
attacks to four dice.
353
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
NATURE INCARNATE SPELL 10
POLYMORPH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions primal
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
The primal power of the world flows through you. You
transform into an incarnation of nature, either a green man
or a kaiju. Your battle form is Medium for a green man or
Gargantuan (30-foot-by-30-foot space) for a kaiju. You must
have enough space to expand into or the spell is lost. While
in this form, you gain the plant trait (for a green man) or the
beast trait (for a kaiju). You can Dismiss the spell.
You gain the following statistics and abilities regardless of
which battle form you choose:
• AC = 25 + your level. Ignore your armor’s check penalty
and Speed reduction.
• 30 temporary Hit Points.
• Darkvision.
• One or more attacks specific to the battle form you
choose, which are the only attacks you can use. You’re
trained with them. Your attack modifier is +34, and
you use the listed damage. These attacks are Strength
based (for the purpose of the enfeebled condition, for
example). If your unarmed attack modifier is higher,
you can use it instead.
• Athletics modifier of +36, unless your own modifier
is higher.
You also gain specific abilities based on the type of
incarnation you choose:
• Green Man Speed 40 feet, climb Speed 40 feet; Melee
[one‑action] vines (reach 30 feet, versatile P), Damage 6d8+12
bludgeoning; Ranged [one‑action] thorns (range 100 feet),
Damage 6d6+6 piercing; Green Caress (aura, primal,
transmutation) 60 feet. Enemies other than plants
must succeed at a Fortitude save against your spell
DC or become clumsy 1 for 1 round (clumsy 2 on a
critical failure).
• Kaiju Speed 50 feet; resistance 5 to physical damage;
Melee [one‑action] jaws (reach 30 feet), Damage 6d10+10
piercing; Melee [one‑action]claws (agile, reach 30 feet), Damage
6d8+8 slashing; Melee [one‑action] foot (agile, reach 15 feet),
Damage 6d6+10 bludgeoning; Unstoppable You are
immune to being immobilized and ignore difficult
terrain and greater difficult terrain; Trample[three‑actions] You
move up to double your Speed and move through the
spaces of Huge or smaller creatures, trampling each
creature whose space you enter. A trampled creature
takes foot damage with a basic Reflex save against
your spell DC.
NATURE’S ENMITY SPELL 9
ENCHANTMENT
Traditions primal
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Area 500-foot burst; Targets up to 5 creatures
Duration 10 minutes
Animals and plants in the area turn against the targets. Each
target suffers from the following effects as long as it remains
in the area.
• Vegetation springs up from every surface, giving each
target a –10-foot circumstance penalty to its Speed
any time it’s adjacent to the plants.
• Aggressive animals attack unpredictably. At the start
of its turn, each target rolls a DC 8 flat check. On a
failure, it’s attacked by swarming creatures that deal
2d10 slashing damage. The target attempts a basic
Reflex save, and it is flat-footed for 1 round on any
outcome other than a critical success.
• The target loses any connection to nature or natural
creatures. The target has to succeed at a DC 5 flat
check when casting any primal spell or the spell fails.
Furthermore, animal or plant creatures become hostile
to it, even one with a strong bond to the target, such
as an animal companion.
The GM might decide that you can’t subject some creatures,
such as an emissary of a nature deity, to the ire of nature.
NEGATE AROMA SPELL 1
ABJURATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 willing creature
Duration 1 hour
The target loses its odor, preventing creatures from passively
noticing its presence via smell alone, even if the creatures have
precise or imprecise scent. A creature attempting a Perception
check to Seek with scent and other senses might notice the
lack of natural scent. If the target has any abilities that result
from its smell, such as an overpowering scent, those abilities
are also negated.
Heightened (5th) The range increases to 30 feet, and you can
target up to 10 creatures.
NEUTRALIZE POISON SPELL 3
HEALING NECROMANCY
Traditions divine, primal
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
You pour healing magic through the target in an attempt
to cure one poison afflicting it. Attempt a counteract check
against the poison.
NIGHTMARE SPELL 4
ILLUSION MENTAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast 10 minutes (material, somatic, verbal)
Range planetary; Targets 1 creature you know by name
Saving Throw Will; Duration 1 day
You send disturbing nightmares to your target. The next time the
target falls asleep, it must attempt a Will save. If you know the
target only by name and have never met them, the target gets a
+4 circumstance bonus to the Will save.
Core Rulebook
354
[[insert art: overwhelming
presence]]
Critical Success The target suffers no adverse effects and is
temporarily immune for 1 week.
Success The target experiences the nightmares but suffers no
adverse effects other than unpleasant memories.
Failure The target experiences the nightmares and awakens
fatigued.
Critical Failure The target experiences the nightmares, awakens
fatigued, and is drained 2 until it is no longer fatigued.
NONDETECTION SPELL 3
UNCOMMON ABJURATION
Traditions arcane, occult, primal
Cast 10 minutes (material, somatic, verbal)
Range touch; Targets 1 creature or object
Duration 8 hours
You erect protective wards that make the target difficult to
detect via magic. Nondetection attempts to counteract all
detection, revelation, and scrying divinations made against the
target or the target’s gear throughout the duration, counting
cantrips as 1st-level spells for this purpose. Successfully
counteracting a divination that targets an area or multiple
targets negates the effects only for nondetection’s target.
OBSCURING MIST SPELL 2
CONJURATION WATER
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[three‑actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Area 20-foot burst
Duration 1 minute
You call forth a cloud of mist. All creatures within the mist
become concealed, and all creatures outside the mist become
concealed to creatures within it. You can Dismiss the cloud.
OUTCAST’S CURSE SPELL 4
ATTACK CURSE ENCHANTMENT MENTAL MISFORTUNE
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will
You afflict the target with a curse that makes its presence
abrasive and off-putting. The target must attempt a Will save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success For 10 minutes, the target must roll twice and
use the worse result whenever attempting a Deception,
Diplomacy, Intimidation, or Performance check, and
creatures they encounter have an initial attitude toward
them of one step worse (for instance, unfriendly instead
of indifferent).
Failure As success, but the effect is permanent.
Critical Failure As failure, and creatures that the target
encounters have an initial attitude toward them of two
steps worse.
355
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
OVERWHELMING PRESENCE SPELL 9
AUDITORY ENCHANTMENT INCAPACITATION MENTAL VISUAL
Traditions divine, occult
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Area 40-foot burst; Targets any number of creatures
Saving Throw Will; Duration until full tribute is paid
You surround yourself with supernatural splendor, appearing
to be a god or similarly majestic being. You choose the aspects
of your new majestic appearance. This causes the targets to
pay tribute to you by bowing or using some other action in
keeping with your appearance. The number of times a target
must do this depends on the result of their Will save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target must pay tribute twice.
Failure The target must pay tribute six times.
Critical Failure As failure, and the target must spend all its
actions paying tribute if possible.
Paying tribute is a manipulate action or move action, as chosen
by the creature paying tribute. A creature under this effect
must pay tribute to you at least once on each of its turns if
possible. While affected by this spell, a creature is fascinated
by you and can’t use hostile actions against you. The target is
then temporarily immune for 1 minute.
PARALYZE SPELL 3
ENCHANTMENT INCAPACITATION MENTAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration varies
You block the target’s motor impulses before they can leave
its mind, threatening to freeze the target in place. The target
must attempt a Will save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target is stunned 1.
Failure The target is paralyzed for 1 round.
Critical Failure The target is paralyzed for 4 rounds. At the
end of each of its turns, it can attempt a new Will save to
reduce the remaining duration by 1 round, or end it entirely
on a critical success.
Heightened (7th) You can target up to 10 creatures.
PARANOIA SPELL 2
ILLUSION MENTAL
Traditions occult
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration 1 minute
You cause the target to see all other creatures as dire threats.
The target is stricken by intense paranoia toward all creatures
around it and must attempt a Will save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target believes everyone it sees is a potential
threat. It becomes unfriendly to all creatures to which it
wasn’t already hostile, even those that were previously
allies. It treats no one as an ally. The spell ends after 1 round.
Failure As success, but the effect lasts 1 minute.
Critical Failure As failure, except the target believes that
everyone it sees is a mortal enemy. It uses its reactions
and free actions against everyone, regardless of whether
they were previously its allies, as determined by the GM. It
otherwise acts as rationally as it normally does and likely
prefers to attack creatures that are actively attacking or
hindering it over those leaving it alone.
Heightened (6th) You can target up to 5 creatures.
PASS WITHOUT TRACE SPELL 1
ABJURATION
Traditions primal
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 hour
You obscure the tracks you leave behind and make it harder
for others to find you. The DC of checks to Track you gains a
+4 status bonus or is equal to your spell DC, whichever results
in a higher DC. You can benefit from only one pass without
trace spell at a time.
Heightened (2nd) The duration increases to 8 hours.
Heightened (4th) The duration increases to 8 hours. The spell
has a range of 20 feet and an area of a 20-foot-emanation,
affecting up to 10 creatures of your choice within that area.
PASSWALL SPELL 5
UNCOMMON CONJURATION EARTH
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Area 5-foot-wide, 10-foot-tall, 10-foot-deep
section of wooden, plaster, or stone wall
Duration 1 hour
You create a visible tunnel through the wall in the chosen area,
replacing the area with empty space. If the wall is thicker than
10 feet, the tunnel ends 10 feet in. Even a small layer of metal
in the wall prevents this spell from functioning. This spell
doesn’t reduce the integrity of the structure. When the spell
ends, anyone inside the tunnel is shunted to the nearest exit.
Heightened (7th) The tunnel can be up to 20 feet deep. The
areas of the wall that contain your tunnel’s entrance appear
completely normal (unless viewed with true seeing or a similar
effect), despite the tunnel’s existence. The tunnel’s entrance
functions as a solid wall, but you can specify a password or a
trigger (page 305), allowing creatures to enter the tunnel freely.
PEST FORM SPELL 1
POLYMORPH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 10 minutes
You transform into a the battle form of a Tiny animal, such as
a cat, insect, lizard, or rat. You can decide the specific type of
animal (such as a rat or praying mantis), but this has no effect
on the form’s Size or statistics. While in this form, you gain the
animal trait. You can Dismiss the spell.
You gain the following statistics and abilities:
Core Rulebook
356
• AC = 15 + your level. Ignore your armor’s check penalty
and Speed reduction.
• Speed 10 feet.
• Weakness 5 to physical damage. (If you take physical
damage in this form, you take 5 additional damage.)
• Low-light vision and imprecise scent 30 feet.
• Acrobatics and Stealth modifiers of +10, unless your
own modifier is higher; Athletics modifier –4.
Heightened (4th) You can turn into a flying creature, such as a
bird, which grants you a fly Speed of 20 feet.
PHANTASMAL CALAMITY SPELL 6
ILLUSION MENTAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Saving Throw Will; Range 500 feet; Area 30-foot burst
A vision of apocalyptic destruction fills the mind of each
creature in the area. The vision deals 11d6 mental damage (basic
Will save). On a critical failure, the creature must also succeed
at a Reflex save or believe it’s trapped (stuck in a fissure, adrift
at sea, or some other fate in keeping with its vision). If it fails
the second save, it’s also stunned for 1 minute. It can attempt a
new Will save at the end of each of its turns, and on a success, it
disbelieves the illusion and recovers from the stunned condition.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d6.
PHANTASMAL KILLER SPELL 4
DEATH EMOTION FEAR ILLUSION MENTAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Targets 1 living creature
Saving Throw Will
You create a phantasmal image of the most fearsome creature
imaginable to the target. Only the spell’s target can see the
killer, though you can see the vague shape of the illusion as
it races forth to attack. The effect of the killer is based on the
outcome of the target’s Will save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target takes 4d6 mental damage and is
frightened 1.
Failure The target takes 8d6 mental damage and is
frightened 2.
Critical Failure The target is so afraid it might die. It must
attempt a Fortitude save; if the target fails, it dies. On a
successful Fortitude save, the target takes 12d6 mental
damage, is fleeing until the end of its next turn, and is
frightened 4. This effect has the incapacitation trait.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d6 on a failure and
by 3d6 on a critical failure.
PHANTOM PAIN SPELL 1
ILLUSION MENTAL NONLETHAL
Traditions occult
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration 1 minute
Illusory pain wracks the target, dealing 2d4 mental damage
and 1d4 persistent mental damage. The target must attempt
a Will save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target takes full initial damage but no persistent
damage, and the spell ends immediately.
Failure The target takes full initial and persistent damage, and
the target is sickened 1. If the target recovers from being
sickened, the persistent damage ends and the spell ends.
Critical Failure As failure, but the target is sickened 2.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d4 and the
persistent damage by 1d4.
PHANTOM STEED SPELL 2
CONJURATION
Traditions arcane, occult, primal
Cast 10 minutes (somatic, verbal)
Range 30 feet
Duration 8 hours
You conjure a Large, magical, equine creature that only you
(or another Medium or Small creature you choose) can ride.
The horse is clearly phantasmal in nature, has 20 AC and 10
Hit Points, and automatically fails all saves. If it’s reduced to
0 Hit Points, it disappears and the spell ends. The steed has
a Speed of 40 feet and can hold its rider’s body weight, plus
20 Bulk.
Heightened (4th) The steed has a Speed of 60 feet, can walk
on water, and ignores areas of natural difficult terrain.
Heightened (5th) The steed has a Speed of 60 feet, can walk
on water, and ignores areas of natural difficult terrain. It can
also air walk but must end its turn on solid ground or fall.
Heightened (6th) The steed can walk or fly at a Speed of 80
feet, can walk on water, and ignores natural difficult terrain.
PLANE SHIFT SPELL 7
UNCOMMON CONJURATION TELEPORTATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult, primal
Cast 10 minutes (focus, material, somatic, verbal)
Range touch; Targets 1 willing creature, or up to 8 willing
creatures joining hands
You and your allies traverse the barriers between planes of
existence. The targets move to another plane, such as the
Plane of Fire, the Shadow Plane, or the Abyss. You must have
specific knowledge of the destination plane and use a magic
tuning fork created from material from that plane as a focus
for the spell. While the tuning forks for most prominent planes
are uncommon, just like the spell plane shift, more obscure
planes and demiplanes often have rare tuning forks.
The spell is highly imprecise, and you appear 1d20×25 miles
from the last place one of the targets (of your choice) was
located the last time that target traveled to the plane. If it’s
the first time traveling to a particular plane for all targets, you
appear at a random location on the plane. Plane shift doesn’t
provide a means of return travel, though casting plane shift
again allows you to return to your previous plane unless there
are extenuating circumstances.
357
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
PLANT FORM SPELL 5
PLANT POLYMORPH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions primal
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
Taking inspiration from verdant creatures, you transform into
a Large plant battle form. You must have space to expand into
or the spell is lost. When you cast this spell, choose arboreal,
flytrap, or shambler. You can substitute a similar specific plant
to turn into (such as a pitcher plant instead of a flytrap), but
this has no effect on the form’s Size or statistics. While in this
form, you gain the plant trait. You can Dismiss the spell.
You gain the following statistics and abilities regardless of
which battle form you choose:
• AC = 19 + your level. Ignore your armor’s check penalty
and Speed reduction.
• 12 temporary Hit Points.
• Resistance 10 to poison.
• Low-light vision.
• One or more unarmed melee attacks specific to the
battle form you choose, which are the only attacks
you can use. You’re trained with them. Your attack
modifier is +17, and your damage bonus is +11. These
attacks are Strength based (for the purpose of the
enfeebled condition, for example). If your unarmed
attack modifier is higher, you can use it instead.
• Athletics modifier of +19, unless your own modifier
is higher.
You also gain specific abilities based on the type of plant
you choose:
• Arboreal Speed 30 feet; Melee [one‑action] branch (reach 15
feet), Damage 2d10 bludgeoning; Melee [one‑action] foot,
Damage 2d8 bludgeoning; you can speak in this
form, but you still can’t Cast a Spell or supply verbal
components.
• Flytrap Speed 15 feet; resistance 10 to acid; Melee [one‑action]
leaf (reach 10 feet), Damage 2d8 piercing, and you can
spend an action after a hit to Grab the target.
• Shambler Speed 20 feet, swim Speed 20 feet;
resistance 10 to electricity; Melee [one‑action] vine (reach 15
feet), Damage 2d8 slashing.
Heightened (6th) Your battle form is Huge, and the reach
of your attacks increases by 5 feet. You instead gain
AC = 22 + your level, 24 temporary HP, attack modifier +21,
damage bonus +16, and Athletics +22.
POLAR RAY SPELL 8
COLD EVOCATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Targets 1 creature or object
You fire a blue-white ray of freezing air and swirling sleet from
your finger that can chill your target to the bones. You must
succeed at a spell attack roll to affect the target, which then
takes 10d8 cold damage and is drained 2.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d8.
POSSESSION SPELL 7
UNCOMMON INCAPACITATION MENTAL NECROMANCY POSSESSION
Traditions occult
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 living creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration 1 minute
You send your mind and soul into the target’s body, attempting
to take control. The target must attempt a Will save. You can
choose to use the effects of a degree of success more favorable
to the target if you prefer.
While you’re possessing a target, your own body is
unconscious and can’t wake up normally. You can sense
everything the possessed target does. You can Dismiss this
spell. If the possessed body dies, the spell ends and you
must succeed at a Fortitude save against your spell DC or
be paralyzed for 1 hour, or 24 hours on a critical failure. If
the spell ends during an encounter, you act just before the
possessed creature’s initiative count.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success You possess the target but can’t control it. You ride
along in the body while the spell lasts.
Failure You possess the target and take partial control of it.
You no longer have a separate turn; instead, you might
control the target. At the start of each of the target’s turns,
it attempts another Will save. If it fails, it’s controlled by you
on that turn; if it succeeds, it chooses its own actions; and
if it critically succeeds, it forces you out and the spell ends.
Critical Failure You possess the target fully, and it can only
watch as you manipulate it like a puppet. The target is
controlled by you.
Heightened (9th) The duration is 10 minutes, and you can
physically enter the creature’s body, protecting your physical
body while the spell lasts.
POWER WORD BLIND SPELL 7
UNCOMMON AUDITORY ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Traditions arcane
Cast [one‑action] verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Duration varies
You utter an arcane word of power that can make the target
blinded upon hearing it. Once targeted, the target is then
temporarily immune for 10 minutes. The effect of the spell
depends on the target’s level.
11th or Lower The target is blinded permanently.
12th–13th The target is blinded for 1d4 minutes.
14th or Higher The target is dazzled for 1 minute.
Heightened (+1) The levels at which each outcome applies
increase by 2.
POWER WORD KILL SPELL 9
UNCOMMON AUDITORY DEATH ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Traditions arcane
Cast [one‑action] verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Duration varies
Core Rulebook
358
You utter the most powerful arcane word of power. Once
targeted, the target is then temporarily immune for 10
minutes. The effect of the spell depends on the target’s level.
14th or Lower The target dies instantly.
15th If the target has 50 Hit Points or fewer, it dies instantly;
otherwise, it drops to 0 Hit Points and becomes dying 1, or
increases its dying condition by 1 if it’s already dying.
16th or Higher The target takes 50 damage; if this brings the
target to 0 Hit Points, the target dies instantly.
Heightened (10th) The levels at which each outcome applies
increase by 2.
POWER WORD STUN SPELL 8
UNCOMMON AUDITORY ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Traditions arcane
Cast [one‑action] verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Duration varies
You stun the target with an arcane word of power. Once
targeted, the target is then temporarily immune for 10
minutes. The effect of the spell depends on the target’s level.
13th or Lower The target is stunned for 1d6 rounds.
14th–15th The target is stunned for 1 round.
16th or Higher The target is stunned 1.
Heightened (+1) The levels at which each outcome applies
increase by 2.
PRESTIDIGITATION CANTRIP 1
CANTRIP EVOCATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult, primal
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Range 10 feet; Targets 1 object (cook, lift, or tidy only)
Duration sustained
The simplest magic does your bidding. You can perform simple
magical effects for as long as you Sustain the Spell. Each time
you Sustain the Spell, you can choose one of four options.
• Cook Cool, warm, or flavor 1 pound of nonliving material.
• Lift Slowly lift an unattended object of light Bulk or
less 1 foot off the ground.
• Make Create a temporary object of negligible Bulk,
made of congealed magical substance. The object
looks crude and artificial and is extremely fragile—it
can’t be used as a tool, weapon, or spell component.
• Tidy Color, clean, or soil an object of light Bulk or less.
You can affect an object of 1 Bulk with 10 rounds of
concentration, and a larger object a 1 minute per Bulk.
Prestidigitation can’t deal damage or cause adverse
conditions. Any actual change to an object (beyond what is
noted above) persists only as long as you Sustain the Spell.
PRIMAL HERD SPELL 10
POLYMORPH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions primal
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets you and up to 5 willing targets
Duration 1 minute
Summoning the power of the natural world, you transform
the targets into a herd of mammoths, and they each assume
a Huge battle form. Each target must have enough space to
expand into or the spell fails for that target. Each target gains
the animal trait. Each target can Dismiss the spell’s effects on
themself. Each target gains the following while transformed:
• AC = 22 + the target’s level. Ignore any armor check
penalty and Speed reduction.
• 20 temporary Hit Points.
• Speed 40 feet.
• Low-light vision.
• The following unarmed melee attacks, which are the
only attacks the target can use. They’re trained with
them. When attacking with these attacks, the target
uses their attack modifier with the proficiency and
item bonuses of their most favorable weapon or
unarmed Strike, and the damage is listed for each
attack. These attacks are Strength based (for the
purpose of the enfeebled condition, for example). If the
target’s unarmed attack modifier is higher, they can
use it instead. Melee [one‑action] tusk (reach 15 feet), Damage
4d8+19 piercing; Melee [one‑action] trunk (agile, reach 15 feet),
Damage 4d6+16 bludgeoning; Melee [one‑action] foot (agile,
reach 15 feet), Damage 4d6+13 bludgeoning.
• Athletics modifier of +30, unless the target’s own
modifier is higher.
• Trample [three‑actions]You move up to twice your Speed and
move through the space of Large or smaller creatures,
trampling each creature whose space you enter. A
trampled creature takes damage from its foot Strike
based on a basic Reflex save (DC = 19 + the target’s level).
PRIMAL PHENOMENON SPELL 10
DIVINATION
Traditions primal
Cast[three‑actions] material, somatic, verbal
You request a direct intercession from the natural world.
Nature always refuses unnatural requests and might grant a
different request (potentially more powerful or better fitting its
character) than the one you asked for. A primal phenomenon
spell can do any of the following things.
• Duplicate any primal spell of 9th level or lower.
• Duplicate any non-primal spell of 7th level or lower.
• Produce any effect whose power level is in line with
the above effects.
• Reverse certain effects that refer to the wish spell.
At the GM’s discretion, you can try to use primal phenomenon
to produce greater effects than these, but doing so may be
dangerous, or the spell may have only a partial effect.
PRISMATIC SPHERE SPELL 9
ABJURATION LIGHT
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Range 10 feet
Duration 1 hour
359
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
You create a seven-layered sphere to protect an area. This
multicolored sphere functions like a prismatic wall but is shaped
in a 10-foot burst centered on a corner of your space. You must
form the sphere in an unbroken open space so its edges don’t
pass through any creatures or objects, or the spell is lost.
PRISMATIC SPRAY SPELL 7
EVOCATION LIGHT
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Area 30-foot cone
A spray of rainbow light beams cascades from your open
hand. Each creature in the area must roll 1d8 on the table
below to see which beam affects it, then attempt a saving
throw of the indicated type. The table notes any additional
traits that apply to each type of ray. If a creature is struck by
multiple beams, it uses the same d20 result for all its saving
throws. For all rays, a successful saving throw negates the
effect for that creature.
1d8 Color Save Effect (Traits)
1 Red Reflex 50 fire damage (fire)
2 Orange Reflex 60 acid damage (acid)
3 Yellow Reflex 70 electricity damage
 (electricity)
4 Green Fortitude 30 poison damage and
 enfeebled 1 for 1 minute
 (poison)
5 Blue Fortitude Affected as if by flesh to stone
6 Indigo Will Confused, as the warp mind
 spell (mental)
7 Violet Will Slowed 1 for 1 minute; if
 a critical failure, sent to
 another plane, as plane shift
 (teleportation)
8 Potent — Affected by two beams—roll
beam twice, rerolling any duplicates
 or results of 8
PRISMATIC WALL SPELL 8
ABJURATION LIGHT
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[three‑actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet
Duration 1 hour
You create an opaque wall of shimmering, multicolored light.
The wall is straight and vertical, stretching 60 feet long and 30
feet high. You must form the wall in an unbroken open space
so its edges don’t pass through any creatures or objects, or the
spell is lost. You can pass through the wall and ignore its effects.
The wall sheds bright light out to 20 feet on each side (and
dim light to the next 20 feet). Creatures other than you that
come into the wall’s light must attempt a Will save; they’re
dazzled for 1 round on a success, blinded for 1 round on a
failure, and blinded for 1 minute on a critical failure. They are
then temporarily immune to the blinding effect for 1 hour.
A prismatic wall has seven different layers, each a different
color. Red, orange, yellow, and green have the effect of a
5th-level chromatic wall (page 323) spell of that color, and
the others have the effect of a 7th-level chromatic wall spell
of that color. A creature that tries to pass through the wall
must attempt a saving throw against each component wall.
The effects take place simultaneously, so a creature turned
to stone by the blue wall is still treated as a creature for the
indigo and violet walls.
The wall as a whole is immune to counteracting effects of
the wall’s level or lower; each color must be counteracted by
its specific spell, as described in chromatic wall. This must be
done in order (red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, then
violet). A given color can’t be affected until the previous color
is counteracted. Counteracting a color wall removes that
color’s effect from the wall, and counteracting them all ends
prismatic wall. You can Dismiss the spell.
PRIVATE SANCTUM SPELL 4
UNCOMMON ABJURATION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast 10 minutes (material, somatic, verbal)
Range touch; Area 100-foot burst
Duration 24 hours
From outside, the area looks like a bank of impenetrable black
fog. Sensory stimuli (such as sounds, smells, and light) don’t
pass from inside the area to outside the area. Scrying spells
can’t perceive any stimuli from the area, and mind-reading
effects don’t work in the area.
PRODUCE FLAME CANTRIP 1
ATTACK CANTRIP EVOCATION FIRE
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
A small ball of flame appears in the palm of your hand, and
you lash out with it either in melee or at range. Make a
spell attack roll against your target’s AC. This is normally a
ranged attack, but you can also make a melee attack against
a creature in your unarmed reach. On a success, you deal
1d4 fire damage plus your spellcasting ability modifier. On
a critical success, the target takes double damage and 1d4
persistent fire damage.
Heightened (+1) Increase the damage by 1d4 and the persistent
damage on a critical hit by 1d4.
PROJECT IMAGE SPELL 7
ILLUSION MENTAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You project an illusory image of yourself. You must stay within
range of the image, and if at any point you can’t see the image,
the spell ends. Whenever you Cast a Spell other than one
whose area is an emanation, you can cause the spell effect
Core Rulebook
360
to originate from either yourself or the image. Because the
image is an illusion, it can’t benefit from spells, though visual
manifestations of the spell appear. The image has the same AC
and saves as you. If it is hit by an attack or fails a save, the
spell ends.
Heightened (+2) The maximum duration you can Sustain the
Spell increases to 10 minutes.
PROTECTION SPELL 1
UNCOMMON ABJURATION
Traditions divine, occult
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Duration 1 minute
You ward a creature against a specified alignment. Choose
chaotic, evil, good, or lawful when you cast this spell.
The target gains a +1 status bonus to Armor Class and
saving throws against creatures and effects of the chosen
alignment. This bonus increases to +3 against effects
from such creatures that would directly control the target
and against attacks made by summoned creatures of the
chosen alignment.
This spell gains the trait that opposes the alignment you
chose—if you choose chaos, this spell gains the lawful trait,
and vice versa; if you choose evil, this spell gains the good
trait, and vice versa.
PRYING EYE SPELL 5
DIVINATION SCRYING
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast 1 minute (material, somatic, verbal)
Range see text
Duration sustained
You create an invisible, floating eye, 1 inch in diameter, at a
location you can see within 500 feet. It sees in all directions
with your normal visual senses and continuously transmits
what it sees to you.
The first time you Sustain the Spell each round, you can
either move the eye up to 30 feet, seeing only things in front
of the eye, or move it up to 10 feet, seeing everything in all
directions around it. There is no limit to how far from you the
eye can move, but the spell ends immediately if you and the
eye ever cease to be on the same plane of existence. You can
attempt Seek actions through the eye if you want to attempt
Perception checks with it. Any damage dealt to the eye
destroys it and ends the spell.
PUNISHING WINDS SPELL 8
AIR EVOCATION
Traditions primal
Cast[three‑actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 100 feet; Area 30-foot radius, 100-foot-tall cylinder
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
361
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Violent winds and a powerful downdraft fill the area, forming
a cyclone. All flying creatures in the area descend 40 feet. The
entire area is greater difficult terrain for Flying creatures, and
difficult terrain for creatures on the ground or Climbing. Any
creature that ends its turn Flying within the area descends 20
feet. Any creature pushed into a surface by this spell’s winds
takes bludgeoning damage as though it had fallen.
The squares at the outside vertical edges of the cylinder
prevent creatures from leaving. These squares are greater
difficult terrain, and a creature attempting to push through
must succeed at an Athletics check or Acrobatics check to
Maneuver in Flight against your spell DC to get through. A
creature that fails ends its current action but can try again.
PURIFY FOOD AND DRINK SPELL 1
NECROMANCY
Traditions divine, primal
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 cubic foot of contaminated food or water
You remove toxins and contaminations from food and drink,
making them safe to consume. This spell doesn’t prevent
future contamination, natural decay, or spoilage. One cubic
foot of liquid is roughly 8 gallons.
PURPLE WORM STING SPELL 6
NECROMANCY POISON
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Fortitude
You replicate the attack of a deadly purple worm. You deal
6d6 piercing damage to the touched creature and afflict
it with purple worm venom. The target must attempt a
Fortitude save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target takes 3d6 poison damage.
Failure The target is afflicted with purple worm venom at stage 1.
Critical Failure The target is afflicted with purple worm venom
at stage 2.
Purple Worm Venom (poison); Level 11; Maximum Duration 6
rounds. Stage 1 3d6 poison damage and enfeebled 2 (1 round);
Stage 2 4d6 poison damage and enfeebled 2 (1 round); Stage
3 6d6 poison damage and enfeebled 2 (1 round).
RAISE DEAD SPELL 6
UNCOMMON HEALING NECROMANCY
Traditions divine
Cast 10 minutes (material, somatic, verbal); Cost diamonds
worth a total value of the target’s level (minimum 1) × 200 gp
Range 10 feet; Targets 1 dead creature of 13th level or lower
You attempt to call forth the dead creature’s soul, requiring the
creature’s body to be present and relatively intact. The creature
must have died within the past 3 days. If Pharasma has decided
that the creature’s time has come (at the GM’s discretion), or if
the creature doesn’t wish to return to life, this spell automatically
fails, but the diamonds aren’t consumed in the casting.
If the spell is successful, the creature returns to life with 1 Hit
Point, no spells prepared or spell slots available, no points in any
pools or any other daily resources, and still with any long-term
debilitations of the old body. The time spent in the Boneyard
leaves the target temporarily debilitated, making it clumsy 2,
drained 2, and enfeebled 2 for 1 week; these conditions can’t be
removed or reduced by any means until the week has passed.
The creature is also permanently changed by its time in the
afterlife, such as a slight personality shift, a streak of white in
the hair, or a strange new birthmark.
Heightened (7th) The maximum level of the target increases to
15. The cost increases to the target’s level (minimum 1) × 400 gp.
Heightened (8th) The maximum level the target increases to 17.
The cost increases to the target’s level (minimum 1) × 800 gp.
Heightened (9th) The maximum level of the target increases
to 19. The cost increases to the target’s level (minimum 1) ×
1,600 gp.
Heightened (10th) The maximum level the target increases
to 21. The cost increases to the target’s level (minimum 1) ×
3,200 gp.
RAY OF ENFEEBLEMENT SPELL 1
ATTACK NECROMANCY
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Fortitude; Duration 1 minute
A ray with the power to sap a foe’s strength flashes from your
hand. Attempt a ranged spell attack against the target. If you
succeed, that creature attempts a Fortitude save in order to
determine the spell’s effect. If you critically succeed on your
attack roll, use the outcome for one degree of success worse
than the result of its save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target becomes enfeebled 1.
Failure The target becomes enfeebled 2.
Critical Failure The target becomes enfeebled 3.
RAY OF FROST CANTRIP 1
ATTACK CANTRIP COLD EVOCATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two‑actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Targets 1 creature
You blast an icy ray. Make a spell attack roll. The ray deals
cold damage equal to 1d4 + your spellcasting ability modifier.
Critical Success The target takes double damage and takes a
–10-foot status penalty to its Speeds for 1 round.
Success The target takes normal damage.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d4.
READ AURA CANTRIP 1
CANTRIP DETECTION DIVINATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult, primal
Cast 1 minute (somatic, verbal)
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 object
You focus on the target object, opening your mind to perceive
Core Rulebook
362
magical auras. When the casting is complete, you know
whether that item is magical, and if it is, you learn the school
of magic (pages 297–298).
If the object is illusory, you detect this only if the effect’s
level is lower than the level of your read aura spell.
Heightened (3rd) You can target up to 10 objects.
Heightened (6th) You can target any number of objects.
READ OMENS SPELL 4
UNCOMMON DIVINATION PREDICTION
Traditions divine, occult
Cast 10 minutes (material, somatic, verbal)
You peek into the future. Choose a particular goal, event, or
activity that will occur within 1 week. You learn a cryptic clue
or piece of advice that could help with the chosen event, often
in the form of a rhyme or omen.
REGENERATE SPELL 7
HEALING NECROMANCY POSITIVE
Traditions divine, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 willing living creature
Duration 1 minute
An infusion of positive energy grants a creature continuous
healing. The target temporarily gains regeneration 15, which
restores 15 Hit Points to it at the start of each of its turns.
While it has regeneration, the target can’t die from damage
and its dying value can’t exceed 3, though if its wounded value
becomes 4 or higher, it stays unconscious until its wounds are
treated. If the target takes acid or fire damage, its regeneration
deactivates until after the end of its next turn.
Each time the creature regains Hit Points from regeneration,
it also regrows one damaged or ruined organ (if any). During
the spell’s duration, the creature can also reattach severed
body parts by spending an Interact action to hold the body
part to the area it was severed from.
Heightened (9th) The regeneration increases to 20.
REMAKE SPELL 10
UNCOMMON CONJURATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult, primal
Cast 1 hour (material, somatic, verbal)
Range 5 feet
You fully re-create an object from nothing, even if the object
was destroyed. To do so, you must be able to picture the
object in your mind. Additionally, the material component
must be a remnant of the item, no matter how small or
insignificant (even a speck of dust that remains from
disintegrate is enough). The spell fails if your imagination
relied on too much guesswork; if the object would be too
large to fit in a 5-foot cube; if the object still exists and you
were simply not aware of it; or if the object is an artifact, has
a level over 20, or has similar vast magical power.
The item reassembles in perfect condition. Even if your
mental image was of a damaged or weathered object, the
new one is in this perfected form. If the object was magical,
this spell typically restores its constant magical properties,
but not any temporary ones, such as charges or one-time
uses. An item with charges or uses per day has all of its
uses expended when remade, but it replenishes them
normally thereafter.
REMOVE CURSE SPELL 4
HEALING NECROMANCY
Traditions divine, occult
Cast 10 minutes (material, somatic, verbal)
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Your touch grants a reprieve to a cursed creature. You attempt
to counteract one curse afflicting the target. If the curse
comes from a cursed item or other external source, a success
indicates that the target creature can rid itself of the cursed
item, but it doesn’t remove the curse from the item.
REMOVE DISEASE SPELL 3
HEALING NECROMANCY
Traditions divine, primal
Cast 10 minutes (material, somatic, verbal)
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Healing magic purges disease from a creature’s body. You
attempt to counteract one disease afflicting the target.
REMOVE FEAR SPELL 2
ENCHANTMENT
Traditions divine, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
With a touch, you ease a creature’s fears. You can attempt
to counteract a single fear effect that the target suffers from.
This frees only the target, not any other creatures under the
fear effect.
Heightened (6th) The spell’s range increases to 30 feet, and
you can target up to 10 creatures.
REMOVE PARALYSIS SPELL 2
HEALING NECROMANCY
Traditions divine, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
A surge of energy frees a paralyzed creature. You can attempt
to counteract a single effect imposing the paralyzed condition
on the target. This does not cure someone who is paralyzed
from some natural state or effect, such as paralysis caused by
non-magical wounds or toxins.
Heightened (6th) The spell’s range increases to 30 feet, and
you can target up to 10 creatures.
REPULSION SPELL 6
ABJURATION AURA MENTAL
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range emanation up to 40 feet
Saving Throw Will; Duration 1 minute
363
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
You manifest an aura that prevents creatures from approaching
you. When casting the spell, you can make the area any radius
you choose, up to 40 feet. A creature must attempt a Will save
if it’s within the area when you cast the spell or as soon as it
enters the area while the spell is in effect. Once a creature has
attempted the save, it uses the same result for that casting
of repulsion. Any restrictions on a creature’s movement apply
only if it voluntarily moves toward you. For example, if you
move closer to a creature, it doesn’t then need to move away.
Critical Success The creature’s movement is not restricted.
Success The creature treats each square in the area as difficult
terrain when moving closer to you.
Failure The creature can’t move closer to you within the area.
RESILIENT SPHERE SPELL 4
ABJURATION FORCE
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 Large or smaller creature
Duration 1 minute
You create an immobile sphere of force to either trap or protect
the target, blocking anything that would pass through the
sphere. The sphere has AC 5, Hardness 10, and 40 Hit Points.
It’s immune to critical hits and precision damage. Disintegrate
destroys the sphere instantly. If the target is unwilling, the
effects of the sphere depend on the target’s Reflex save.
Critical Success The target disrupts the sphere’s integrity,
causing it to collapse entirely.
Success The sphere functions normally but has only 10 Hit
Points instead of 40.
Failure The sphere has its normal effect.
RESIST ENERGY SPELL 2
ABJURATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Duration 10 minutes
A shield of elemental energy protects a creature against one
type of energy damage. Choose acid, cold, electricity, fire, or
sonic damage. The target and its gear gain resistance 5 against
the damage type you chose.
Heightened (4th) The resistance increases to 10, and you can
target up to two creatures.
Heightened (7th) The resistance increases to 15, and you can
target up to five creatures.
RESPLENDENT MANSION SPELL 9
CONJURATION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast 1 minute (material, somatic, verbal)
Range 500 feet
Duration until the next time you make your daily preparations
You conjure a towering mansion up to four stories tall and
up to 300 feet on a side. While Casting the Spell, you hold
an image of the mansion and its desired appearance in
your mind. The mansion can contain as many or as few rooms
as you desire, and it is decorated as you imagine it. You can
imagine a purpose for each room of the mansion, and the proper
accouterments appear within. Any furniture or other mundane
fixtures function normally for anyone inside the mansion, but
they cease to exist if taken beyond its walls. No fixture created
with this spell can create magical effects, but magical devices
brought into the mansion function normally.
Your mansion contains the same types and quantities
of foodstuffs and servants as created by the magnificent
mansion spell.
Each of the mansion’s exterior doorways and windows
are protected by alarm spells. You choose whether each
alarm is audible or mental as you Cast the Spell, and each
has a different sound (for an audible alarm) or sensation (for
a mental one), allowing you to instantly determine which
portal has been used.
RESTORATION SPELL 2
HEALING NECROMANCY
Traditions divine, occult, primal
Cast 1 minute (somatic, verbal)
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Restorative magic counters the effects of toxins or conditions
that prevent a creature from functioning at its best. When you
cast restoration, choose to either reduce a condition or lessen the
effect of a toxin. A creature can benefit from only one restoration
spell each day, and it can’t benefit from restoration more than
once to reduce the stage of the same exposure to a given toxin.
• Reduce a Condition Reduce the value of the target’s
clumsy, enfeebled, or stupefied condition by 2. You can
instead reduce two of the listed conditions by 1 each.
• Lessen a Toxin Reduce the stage of one toxin the
target suffers from by one stage. This can’t reduce the
stage below stage 1 or cure the affliction.
Heightened (4th) Add drained to the list of conditions you can
reduce. When you lessen a toxin, reduce the stage by two. You
also gain a third option that allows you to reduce the target’s
doomed value by 1. You can’t use this to reduce a permanent
doomed condition.
Heightened (6th) As the 4th-level restoration, but you can
reduce a permanent doomed condition if you add a spellcasting
action and a material component while Casting the Spell, during
which you provide 100 gp worth of diamond dust as a cost.
RESTORE SENSES SPELL 2
HEALING NECROMANCY
Traditions divine, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
You attempt to counteract a single effect imposing the blinded
or deafened conditions on the target, restoring its vision
or hearing. This can counteract both temporary magic and
permanent consequences of magic, but it doesn’t cure someone
who does not have the sense due to some natural state or
effect, such as from birth or from a non-magical wound or toxin.
Core Rulebook
364
Heightened (6th) The spell’s range increases to 30 feet, and
you can target up to 10 creatures. You can choose the effect to
counteract separately for each selected creature.
RETROCOGNITION SPELL 7
DIVINATION
Traditions occult
Cast 1 minute (material, somatic, verbal)
Duration sustained
Opening your mind to occult echoes, you gain impressions
from past events that occurred in your current location.
Retrocognition reveals psychic impressions from events that
occurred over the course of the last day throughout the first
minute of the duration, followed by impressions from the next
day back the next minute, and so on. These echoes don’t play
out like a vision but instead reveal impressions of emotions
and metaphors that provide cryptic clues and details of the
past. If you witness a traumatic or turbulent event through
an impression, the spell ends unless you succeed at a Will
save with a DC of at least 30 and possibly as much as 50,
depending on the severity of the event. The GM determines
whether an event is traumatic and chooses the DC.
Heightened (8th) You gain impressions of events that occurred
over the previous year for each minute you concentrate, instead
of the previous day, though the details diminish, making it harder
to distinguish impressions from all but the most major events.
Heightened (9th) You gain impressions of events that occurred
over the previous century for each minute you concentrate,
instead of the previous day, though the details diminish,
making it almost impossible to distinguish impressions from
all but the most major events.
REVERSE GRAVITY SPELL 7
UNCOMMON EVOCATION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Area 20-foot radius, 40-foot-tall cylinder
Duration 1 minute
You reverse gravity in the area. Creatures and objects that
aren’t secured to the ground immediately fall upward to the
top of the  area. A creature might be able to Grab an Edge
to arrest its fall if it falls past an appropriate surface. If a
creature falls against a solid object (such as a ceiling), it takes
the appropriate amount of falling damage and lands on the
surface. Once an object or creature reaches the top of the area,
it floats, caught between the normal and reversed gravity. The
creature can move along the plane where the two forms of
gravity meet. Creatures that can levitate or fly can use those
abilities to mitigate the effects of reverse gravity.
When reverse gravity ends, all creatures and objects caught
in the area fall back down. Likewise, anything that moves
beyond the spell’s area is subjected to normal gravity again.
365
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
REVIVAL SPELL 10
HEALING NECROMANCY POSITIVE
Traditions divine, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets dead creatures and living creatures of
your choice within range
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
A burst of healing energy soothes living creatures and
temporarily rouses those recently slain. All living targets regain
10d8+40 Hit Points. In addition, you return any number of dead
targets to life temporarily, with the same effects and limitations
as raise dead (page 362). The raised creatures have a number
of temporary Hit Points equal to the Hit Points you gave living
creatures, but no normal Hit Points. The raised creatures can’t
regain Hit Points or gain temporary Hit Points in other ways, and
once revival’s duration ends, they lose all temporary Hit Points
and die. Revival can’t resurrect creatures killed by disintegrate
or a death effect. It has no effect on undead.
RIGHTEOUS MIGHT SPELL 6
POLYMORPH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions divine
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal; Requirements You have a deity.
Duration 1 minute
You focus all your divine energy and transform yourself
into a Medium battle form, similar to your normal form but
armed with powerful divine armaments granted by your
deity. While in this form, you gain the statistics and abilities
listed below. You have hands in this battle form and can use
manipulate actions. You can Dismiss the spell.
You gain the following statistics and abilities:
• AC = 20 + your level. Ignore your armor’s check
penalty and Speed reduction.
• 10 temporary Hit Points.
• Speed 40 feet.
• Resistance 3 against physical damage.
• Darkvision.
• A special attack with a righteous armament version
of your favored weapon, which is the only attack
you can use. Your attack modifier with the special
weapon is +21, and your damage bonus is +8 (or +6
for a ranged attack). If your attack modifier with
your deity’s favored weapon is higher, you can use
it instead. You deal three of your weapon’s normal
damage dice, or three damage dice of one size
larger if your weapon is a simple weapon with a
d4 or d6 damage die. The weapon has one of the
following properties that matches your deity’s
alignment: anarchic, axiomatic, holy, unholy. If your
deity is true neutral, you instead deal an extra 1d6
precision damage.
• Athletics modifier of +23, unless your own modifier
is higher.
Heightened (8th) Your battle form is Large, and your attacks have
10-foot reach, or 15-foot reach if your deity’s favored weapon
has reach. You must have enough space to expand into or the
spell is lost. You instead gain AC = 21 + your level, 15 temporary
HP, resistance 4 against physical damage, attack modifier +28,
damage bonus +15 (+12 for a ranged attack), and Athletics +29.
ROPE TRICK SPELL 4
UNCOMMON CONJURATION EXTRADIMENSIONAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast 10 minutes (material, somatic, verbal)
Range touch; Targets 1 touched piece of rope from 5 to 30
feet long
Duration 8 hours
You cause the target rope to rise vertically into the air. Where it
ends, an extradimensional space opens, connected to the top of
the rope. This space can be reached only by climbing the rope.
The entrance to the space can’t be seen, and it can be
pinpointed only by the presence of the rope. The rope can’t
be removed or hidden, though it can be detached from the
extradimensional space by pulling it with 16,000 pounds of
weight, critically succeeding at an Athletics check against the
spell’s DC, or destroying the rope. The space holds up to eight
Medium creatures and their gear. A Large creature counts as
two Medium creatures, a Huge creature counts as four Medium
creatures, and a Gargantuan creature fills the space on its own.
If the rope is detached or destroyed, or if a creature attempts
to enter the space that would put it over its capacity, the space
begins to unravel. It disappears in 1d4 rounds, depositing the
creatures within safely on the ground below.
SANCTIFIED GROUND SPELL 3
ABJURATION CONSECRATION
Traditions divine
Cast 1 minute (material, somatic, verbal); Cost 1 vial of holy water
Area 30-foot burst centered on you
Duration 24 hours
You sanctify the area, sprinkling it with holy water and warding
it against your foes. Choose aberrations, celestials, dragons,
fiends, monitors, or undead. All creatures in the area gain a
+1 status bonus to AC, attack rolls, damage rolls, and saving
throws against the chosen creatures.
SANCTUARY SPELL 1
ABJURATION
Traditions divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Duration 1 minute
You ward a creature with protective energy that deters enemy
attacks. Creatures attempting to attack the target must
attempt a Will save each time. If the target uses a hostile
action, the spell ends.
Critical Success Sanctuary ends.
Success The creature can attempt its attack and any other
attacks against the target this turn.
Failure The creature can’t attack the target and wastes the
action. It can’t attempt further attacks against the target
this turn.
Core Rulebook
366
Critical Failure The creature wastes the action and can’t attempt
to attack the target for the rest of sanctuary’s duration.
SCINTILLATING PATTERN SPELL 8
ILLUSION INCAPACITATION VISUAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] material, somatic
Range 120 feet; Area 20-foot burst
Saving Throw Will; Duration sustained up to 1 minute
A field of cascading, ever-changing colors manifests in the air.
Creatures are dazzled while inside the pattern, as are those
within 20 feet of the pattern’s area. A creature must attempt
a Will save if it is inside the pattern when you cast it, enters
the pattern, ends its turn within the pattern, or uses a Seek or
Interact action on the pattern. A creature currently affected by
the pattern doesn’t need to attempt new saves.
Success The creature is unaffected.
Failure The creature is confused for 1d4 rounds.
Critical Failure The creature is stunned for 1d4 rounds. After
the stunned condition ends, the creature is confused for the
remaining duration of the spell.
SCRYING SPELL 6
UNCOMMON DIVINATION SCRYING
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast 10 minutes (material, somatic, verbal)
Range planetary; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration sustained up to 10 minutes
You magically spy on a creature of your choice. Scrying works
like clairvoyance (page 324), except that the image you receive
is less precise, insufficient for teleport and similar spells.
Instead of creating an eye in a set location within 500 feet, you
instead create an eye that manifests just above the target. You
can choose a target either by name or by touching one of its
possessions or a piece of its body. If you haven’t met the target
in person, scrying’s DC is 2 lower, and if you are unaware of
the target’s identity (perhaps because you found an unknown
creature’s fang at a crime scene), the DC is instead 10 lower.
The effect of scrying depends on the target’s Will save.
Critical Success The spell fails and the target is temporarily
immune for 1 week. The target also gains a glimpse of you
and learns its rough distance and direction from you.
Success The spell fails and the target is temporarily immune
for 1 day.
Failure The spell succeeds.
Critical Failure The spell succeeds, and the eye follows the
target if it moves, traveling up to 60 feet per round.
SEARING LIGHT SPELL 3
ATTACK EVOCATION FIRE GOOD LIGHT
Traditions divine, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Targets 1 creature
You shoot a blazing ray of light tinged with holy energy. Make a
ranged spell attack. The ray deals 5d6 fire damage. If the target is
a fiend or undead, you deal an extra 5d6 good damage.
Critical Success The target takes double fire damage, as well
as double good damage if a fiend or undead.
Success The target takes full damage
If the light passes through an area of magical darkness or
targets a creature affected by magical darkness, searing light
attempts to counteract the darkness. If you need to determine
whether the light passes through an area of darkness, draw a
line between yourself and the spell’s target
Heightened (+1) The fire damage increases by 2d6, and the
good damage against fiends and undead increases by 2d6.
SECRET PAGE SPELL 3
ILLUSION VISUAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast 1 minute (material, somatic, verbal)
Range touch; Targets 1 page up to 3 square feet in size
Duration unlimited
You change the target’s text to different text entirely. If the text
is a spellbook or a scroll, you can change it to show a spell you
know of secret page’s level or lower. The replacement spell cannot
be cast or used to prepare a spell. You can also transform the text
into some other text you have written or have access to. You can
specify a password that allows a creature touching the page to
change the text back and forth. You must choose the replacement
text and the password, if any, when you Cast the Spell.
SEE INVISIBILITY SPELL 2
DIVINATION REVELATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 10 minutes
You can see invisible creatures and objects. They appear to
you as translucent shapes, and they are concealed to you.
Heightened (5th) The spell has a duration of 8 hours.
SENDING SPELL 5
DIVINATION MENTAL
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range planetary; Targets 1 creature with whom you are familiar
You send the creature a mental message of 25 words or fewer,
and it can respond immediately with its own message of 25
words or fewer.
SHADOW BLAST SPELL 5
EVOCATION SHADOW
Traditions divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range varies; Area varies
Saving Throw basic Reflex or Will (target’s choice)
You shape the quasi-real substance of the Shadow Plane into
a blast. Choose acid, bludgeoning, cold, electricity, fire, force,
piercing, slashing, or sonic damage, and choose a 30-foot cone,
a 15-foot burst within 120 feet, or a 50-foot line. The blast deals
5d8 damage of the type you chose to each creature in the area.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d8.
367
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SHADOW SIPHON SPELL 5
ILLUSION SHADOW
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast [reaction] verbal; Trigger A spell or magical effect deals damage.
Range 60 feet; Targets the triggering spell
Exchanging material energy with that of the Shadow Plane,
you transform the triggering spell into a partially illusory
version of itself. Attempt to counteract the target spell. If the
attempt is successful, any creatures that would be damaged
by the spell instead take only half as much damage. but
the spell otherwise works as normal. Treat shadow siphon’s
counteract level as 2 higher for this attempt.
SHADOW WALK SPELL 5
UNCOMMON CONJURATION SHADOW TELEPORTATION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast 1 minute (material, somatic, verbal)
Range touch; Targets you and up to 9 willing creatures touched
Duration 8 hours
You access the Shadow Plane, using its warped nature to
spread your travels. The targets enter the edge of the Shadow
Plane where it borders the Material Plane. Targets can’t see
the Material Plane while on the Shadow Plane (although
elements of that plane can sometimes be a hazy reflection
of the Material Plane). While on the Shadow Plane, the
targets are exposed to potential encounters with that plane’s
denizens. The shadows on the border between the planes
bend space, speeding up your movement with respect to the
Material Plane. Every 3 minutes the targets travel along this
border, they move as far as they would through the Material
Plane in 1 hour. At any point, a target can Dismiss the spell’s
effects, although this affects only that target. The shadow
bending is inexact, so when the spell ends, the targets
appear roughly 1 mile from their intended location on the
Material Plane (though those who are traveling together and
Dismiss the spell at the same point on the Plane of Shadow
appear together).
SHAPE STONE SPELL 4
EARTH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets cube of stone 10 feet across or smaller
You shape the stone into a rough shape of your choice. The
shaping process is too crude to produce intricate parts, fine
details, moving pieces, or the like. Any creatures standing
atop the stone when you reshape it must each attempt a
Reflex save or Acrobatics check.
Success The creature is unaffected.
Failure The creature falls prone atop the stone.
Critical Failure The creature falls off the stone (if applicable)
and lands prone.
SHAPE WOOD SPELL 2
PLANT TRANSMUTATION
Traditions primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets an unworked piece of wood up to 20
cubic feet in volume
You shape the wood into a rough shape of your choice. The
shaping power is too crude to produce with intricate parts,
fine details, moving pieces, or the like. You cannot use
this spell to enhance the value of the wooden object you
are shaping.
SHAPECHANGE SPELL 9
POLYMORPH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
Harnessing your mastery of transformative magic, you take
on a mutable form. You transform yourself into any form you
could choose with a polymorph spell in your spell repertoire
or that you could prepare of 8th level or lower (including
any 8th-level or lower heightened versions of spells you
know). You choose the type of creature as you Cast the
Spell rather than when you prepare it. You can change your
form to any other form you could choose with this spell by
using a single action, which has the concentrate trait. You
can Dismiss this spell.
SHATTER SPELL 2
EVOCATION SONIC
Traditions occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 unattended object
A high-frequency sonic attack shatters a nearby object. You
deal 2d10 sonic damage to the object, ignoring the object’s
Hardness if it is 4 or lower.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d10, and the
Hardness the spell ignores increases by 2.
SHIELD CANTRIP 1
ABJURATION CANTRIP FORCE
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast [one-action] verbal
Duration until the start of your next turn
You raise a magical shield of force. This counts as using the
Raise a Shield action, giving you a +1 circumstance bonus to
AC until the start of your next turn, but it doesn’t require a
hand to use.
While the spell is in effect, you can use the Shield Block
reaction with your magic shield (see the sidebar). The shield
has Hardness 5. After you use Shield Block, the spell ends
and you can’t cast it again for 10 minutes. Unlike a normal
Shield Block, you can use the spell’s reaction against the magic
missile spell.
Heightening the spell increases the shield’s Hardness.
Heightened (3rd) The shield has Hardness 10.
Heightened (5th) The shield has Hardness 15.
Heightened (7th) The shield has Hardness 20.
Heightened (9th) The shield has Hardness 25.
Core Rulebook
368
SHIELD ACTIONS
The shield spell works like a raised shield, and it also
gives you the ability to use the Shield Block reaction.
SHIELD BLOCK [reaction]
Trigger While you have your shield raised, you take
damage from a physical attack.
You place your shield to ward off a blow. Your shield prevents
you from taking an amount of damage up to the shield’s
Hardness. You and the shield each take any remaining
damage, possibly breaking or destroying the shield.
SHIELD OTHER SPELL 2
NECROMANCY
Traditions divine
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Duration 10 minutes
You forge a temporary link between the target’s life essence
and your own. The target takes half damage from all effects
that deal Hit Point damage, and you take the remainder of the
damage. When you take damage through this link, you don’t
apply any resistances, weaknesses, or other abilities you have
to that damage; you simply take that amount of damage. The
spell ends if the target is ever more than 30 feet away from
you. If either you or the target is reduced to 0 Hit Points, any
damage from this spell is resolved and then the spell ends.
SHILLELAGH SPELL 1
PLANT TRANSMUTATION
Traditions primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 non-magical club or staff you hold
Duration 1 minute
The target grows vines and leaves, brimming with primal
energy. The target becomes a +1 striking weapon while in your
hands, gaining a +1 item bonus to attack rolls and increasing
the number of weapon damage dice to two. Additionally, as
long as you are on your home plane, attacks you make with
the target against aberrations, extraplanar creatures, and
undead increase the number of weapon damage dice to three.
SHOCKING GRASP SPELL 1
ATTACK ELECTRICITY EVOCATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
You shroud your hands in a crackling field of lightning. Make
a melee spell attack roll. On a hit, the target takes 2d12
electricity damage. If the target is wearing metal armor or
is made of metal, you gain a +1 circumstance bonus to your
attack roll with shocking grasp, and the target also takes 1d4
persistent electricity damage on a hit. On a critical hit, double
the initial damage, but not the persistent damage.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d12, and the
persistent electricity damage increases by 1.
SHRINK SPELL 2
POLYMORPH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 willing creature
Duration 5 minutes
You warp space to make a creature smaller. The target shrinks
to become Tiny in size. Its equipment shrinks with it but
returns to its original size if removed. The creature’s reach
changes to 0 feet. This spell has no effect on a Tiny creature.
Heightened (6th) The spell can target up to 10 creatures.
SHRINK ITEM SPELL 3
POLYMORPH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane
Cast 10 minutes (somatic, verbal)
Range touch; Targets 1 non-magical object up to 20 cubic feet
in volume and up to 80 Bulk
Duration 1 day
You shrink the target to roughly the size of a coin. This reduces
it to negligible Bulk. You can Dismiss the spell, and the spell
ends if you toss the object onto a solid surface. The object
can’t be used to attack or cause damage during the process of
it returning to normal size. If there isn’t room for the object to
return to normal size when the spell ends, the spell’s duration
continues until the object is in a location large enough to
accommodate its normal size.
SIGIL CANTRIP 1
CANTRIP TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature or object
Duration unlimited (see below)
You harmlessly place your unique magical sigil, which is about
1 square inch in size, on the targeted creature or object. The
mark can be visible or invisible, and you can change it from
one state to another by using an Interact action to touch
the target. The mark can be scrubbed or scraped off with 5
minutes of work. If it’s on a creature, it fades naturally over
the course of a week. The time before the mark fades increases
depending on your heightened level.
Heightened (3rd) The sigil instead fades after 1 month.
Heightened (5th) The sigil instead fades after 1 year.
Heightened (7th) The sigil never fades.
SILENCE SPELL 2
ILLUSION
Traditions divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] material, somatic
Range touch; Targets 1 willing creature
Duration 1 minute
The target makes no sound, preventing creatures from noticing
it using hearing or other senses alone. The target can’t use
sonic attacks, nor can it use actions with the auditory trait. This
prevents it from casting spells that include verbal components.
369
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Heightened (4th) The spell effect emanates from the touched
creature, silencing all sound in or passing through a 10-
foot radius and preventing any auditory and sonic effects
in the affected area. While within the radius, creatures are
subject to the same effects as the target. Depending upon
the position of the effect, a creature might notice the lack
of sound reaching it (blocking off the noise coming from a
party, for example).
SLEEP SPELL 1
ENCHANTMENT INCAPACITATION MENTAL SLEEP
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Area 5-foot burst
Saving Throw Will
Each creature in the area becomes drowsy and might fall
asleep. A creature that falls unconscious from this spell
doesn’t fall prone or release what it’s holding. This spell
doesn’t prevent creatures from waking up due to a successful
Perception check, limiting its utility in combat.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature takes a –1 status penalty to Perception
checks for 1 round.
Failure The creature falls unconscious. If it’s still unconscious
after 1 minute, it wakes up automatically.
Critical Failure The creature falls unconscious. If it’s still
unconscious after 1 hour, it wakes up automatically.
Heightened (4th) The creatures fall unconscious for 1 round on
a failure or 1 minute on a critical failure. They fall prone and
release what they’re holding, and they can’t attempt Perception
checks to wake up. When the duration ends, the creature is
sleeping normally instead of automatically waking up.
SLOW SPELL 3
TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Fortitude; Duration 1 minute
You dilate the flow of time around the target, slowing its actions.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target is slowed 1 for 1 round.
Failure The target is slowed 1 for 1 minute.
Critical Failure The target is slowed 2 for 1 minute.
Heightened (6th) You can target up to 10 creatures.
SOLID FOG SPELL 4
CONJURATION WATER
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Area 20-foot burst
Duration 1 minute
You conjure a bank of fog so thick it impedes movement as
well as sight. This functions as obscuring mist (page 355),
except that the area is also difficult terrain. You can Dismiss
the spell.
SOOTHE SPELL 1
EMOTION ENCHANTMENT HEALING MENTAL
Traditions occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 willing living creature
Duration 1 minute
You grace the target’s mind, boosting its mental defenses
and healing its wounds. The target regains 1d10+4 Hit Points
when you Cast the Spell and gains a +2 status bonus to saves
against mental effects for the duration.
Heightened (+1) The amount of healing increases by 1d10+4.
SOUND BURST SPELL 2
EVOCATION SONIC
Traditions divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Area 10-foot burst
Saving Throw Fortitude
A cacophonous noise blasts out, dealing 2d10 sonic damage.
Each creature must attempt a Fortitude save.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature takes half damage.
Failure The creature takes full damage and is deafened for 1 round.
Critical Failure The creature takes double damage and is
deafened and stunned 1 for 1 minute.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d10.
SPEAK WITH ANIMALS SPELL 2
DIVINATION
Traditions primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 10 minutes
You can ask questions of, receive answers from, and use the
Diplomacy skill with animals. The spell doesn’t make them more
friendly than normal. Cunning animals are likely to be terse and
evasive, while less intelligent ones often make inane comments.
SPEAK WITH PLANTS SPELL 4
DIVINATION PLANT
Traditions primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 10 minutes
You can ask questions of and receive answers from plants, but
the spell doesn’t make them more friendly or intelligent than
normal. Most normal plants have a distinctive view of the world
around them, so they don’t recognize details about creatures or
know anything about the world beyond their immediate vicinity.
Cunning plant monsters are likely to be terse and evasive, while
less intelligent ones often make inane comments.
SPECTRAL HAND SPELL 2
NECROMANCY
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet
Duration 1 minute
Core Rulebook
370
You create a semicorporeal hand out of your essence that
delivers touch spells for you. Whenever you Cast a Spell with a
range of touch, you can have the hand crawl to a target within
range along the ground, touch it, and then crawl back to you.
When making a melee spell attack with the hand, you use your
normal bonuses. The hand can move as far as it needs to within
range. The hand has your AC and saves, but any damage to the
hand destroys it and causes you to take 1d6 damage.
SPELL IMMUNITY SPELL 4
ABJURATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Duration 24 hours
You ward a creature against the effects of a single spell. Choose
a spell and name it aloud as part of the verbal component. Spell
immunity attempts to counteract that spell whenever spell
immunity’s target is the target of the named spell or in that
spell’s area. Successfully counteracting a spell that targets
an area or multiple targets with spell immunity negates the
effects only for the target affected by spell immunity.
SPELL TURNING SPELL 7
UNCOMMON ABJURATION
Traditions arcane
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 hour
This abjuration reflects spells cast at you back at their caster.
When a spell targets you, you can spend a reaction to attempt
to reflect it. This uses the rules for counteracting the spell, but
if the spell is successfully counteracted, the effect is turned
back on the caster. Whether or not the counteract attempt is
successful, spell turning then ends. Spell turning can’t affect
spells that aren’t targeted (such as area spells).
If spell turning reflects a spell back at a caster who is also
under the effect of spell turning, their spell turning can attempt
to reflect their own spell back at you again; if they do so, their
counteract attempt automatically succeeds.
SPELLWRACK SPELL 6
ABJURATION CURSE FORCE
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will
You cause any spells cast on the target to spill out their energy
in harmful surges. The target must attempt a Will save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success Whenever the target becomes affected by a spell with
a duration, the target takes 2d12 persistent force damage.
Each time it takes persistent force damage from spellwrack,
it reduces the remaining duration of spells affecting it by 1
round. Only a successful Arcana check against your spell
DC can help the target recover from the persistent damage;
the curse and the persistent damage end after 1 minute.
Failure As success, but the curse and persistent damage do
not end on their own.
Critical Failure As failure, but the persistent force damage
is 4d12.
SPIDER CLIMB SPELL 2
TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Duration 10 minutes
Tiny clinging hairs sprout across the creature’s hands and feet,
offering purchase on nearly any surface. The target gains a
climb Speed equal to its Speed.
Heightened (5th) The duration increases to 1 hour.
SPIDER STING SPELL 1
ATTACK NECROMANCY POISON
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Fortitude
You magically duplicate a spider’s venomous sting. You deal
1d4 piercing damage to the touched creature and afflict it
with spider venom. The target must attempt a Fortitude save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target takes 1d4 poison damage.
Failure The target is afflicted with spider venom at stage 1.
Critical Failure The target is afflicted with spider venom at
stage 2.
Spider Venom (poison); Level 1; Maximum Duration 4 rounds.
Stage 1 1d4 poison damage and enfeebled 1 (1 round); Stage
2 1d4 poison damage and enfeebled 2 (1 round).
SPIRIT BLAST SPELL 6
FORCE NECROMANCY
Traditions divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw basic Fortitude
You concentrate ethereal energy and attack a creature’s
spirit, dealing 16d6 force damage. Because spirit blast affects
the creature’s spirit, it can damage a target projecting its
consciousness (such as via project image) or possessing
another creature even if the target’s body is elsewhere. The
possessed creature isn’t harmed by the blast. The blast doesn’t
harm creatures that have no spirit, such as constructs.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d6.
SPIRIT LINK SPELL 1
HEALING NECROMANCY
Traditions divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 willing creature
Duration 10 minutes
You form a spiritual link with another creature, allowing you
371
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
to take in its pain. When you Cast this Spell and at the start of
each of your turns, if the target is below maximum Hit Points,
it regains 2 Hit Points (or the difference between its current
and maximum Hit Points, if that’s lower). You lose as many Hit
Points as the target regained.
This is a spiritual transfer, so no effects apply that would
increase the Hit Points the target regains or decrease the Hit
Points you lose. This transfer also ignores any temporary Hit
Points you or the target have. Since this effect doesn’t involve
positive or negative energy, spirit link works even if you or the
target is undead. While the duration persists, you gain no benefit
from regeneration or fast healing. You can Dismiss this spell,
and if you’re ever at 0 Hit Points, spirit link ends automatically.
Heightened (+1) The number of Hit Points transferred each
time increases by 2.
SPIRIT SONG SPELL 8
FORCE NECROMANCY
Traditions occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 60-foot cone
Saving Throw basic Fortitude
Your eldritch song sends pulsing waves of ethereal energy
to attack creatures’ spirits in the area, dealing 18d6 force
damage. Because spirit song affects creatures’ spirits, it can
damage a target projecting its consciousness (such as via
project image) or possessing another creature even if the
target’s body is elsewhere. The vibrating waves of spiritual
song penetrate into, but not through, solid barriers, damaging
incorporeal creatures hiding in solid objects in the area but
not passing onward to damage creatures in other rooms.
Possessed creatures aren’t harmed by the song. The song
doesn’t harm creatures that have no spirit, such as constructs.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d6.
SPIRITUAL EPIDEMIC SPELL 8
CURSE NECROMANCY
Traditions divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration varies
You curse the target, sapping its spirit and leaving a contagious
trap in its essence. The target must attempt a Will save. Any
creature that casts a divine or occult spell on the target while
it’s affected is targeted by spiritual epidemic and must also
attempt a Will save. The curse continues to spread in this way.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target is enfeebled 2 and stupefied 2 for 1 round.
Failure The target is enfeebled 2 and stupefied 2 for 1 minute
and enfeebled 1 and stupefied 1 permanently.
Critical Failure The target is enfeebled 3 and stupefied 3 for 1
minute and enfeebled 2 and stupefied 2 permanently.
Core Rulebook
372
SPIRITUAL GUARDIAN SPELL 5
ATTACK ABJURATION FORCE
Traditions divine
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal; Requirements You have a deity.
Range 120 feet
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
A Medium guardian made of magical force appears and
attacks foes you designate within range. The spiritual
guardian is translucent and appears to be holding your deity’s
favored weapon.
When you Cast the Spell, the spiritual guardian appears in
an unoccupied space next to a foe of your choice within range
and makes a Strike against it. Each time you Sustain the
Spell, you can move the spiritual guardian to an unoccupied
space next to a target within range (if necessary) and make
a Strike with it. The guardian uses and contributes to your
multiple attack penalty. Alternatively, when you Sustain the
Spell, you can have the guardian move adjacent to an ally
and protect that ally. If you do, each time the ally would take
damage, the guardian takes the first 10 damage instead of
your ally. It continues to do so until you move the guardian
to attack an enemy or defend a different ally, or until the
guardian is destroyed (it has 50 Hit Points and can’t recover
Hit Points by any means). The guardian can’t usually take
damage except when protecting an ally, though disintegrate
automatically destroys it if it hits the spiritual guardian’s AC
of 25.
The guardian’s Strikes are melee spell attacks. Regardless
of the appearance of the guardian’s weapon, the guardian
deals force damage equal to 2d8 plus your spellcasting ability
modifier, but you can deal damage of the type normally dealt
by the weapon it holds instead of force damage. No other traits
or statistics of the weapon apply, and even a ranged weapon
attacks adjacent creatures only. Despite making a spell attack,
the spiritual guardian’s weapon is a weapon for the purposes
of triggers, resistances, and so forth.
The guardian takes up space and allies can use it when
flanking, but it doesn’t have any other attributes a creature
would normally have aside from Hit Points, and creatures
can move through its space without hindrance. The guardian
can’t make any attack other than its Strike, and feats or
spells that affect weapons or enhance allies do not apply to
the guardian.
Heightened (+2) The guardian’s damage increases by 1d8, and
its Hit Points increase by 20.
SPIRITUAL WEAPON SPELL 2
ATTACK EVOCATION FORCE
Traditions divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal; Requirements You have a deity.
Range 120 feet
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
A weapon made of pure magical force materializes and
attacks foes you designate within range. This weapon
has a ghostly appearance and manifests as your deity’s
favored weapon.
When you cast the spell, the weapon appears next to a foe
you choose within range and makes a Strike against it. Each
time you Sustain the Spell, you can move the weapon to a new
target within range (if needed) and Strike with it. The spiritual
weapon uses and contributes to your multiple attack penalty.
The weapon’s Strikes are melee spell attacks. Regardless
of its appearance, the weapon deals force damage equal to
1d8 plus your spellcasting ability modifier. You can deal
damage of the type normally dealt by the weapon instead
of force damage (or any of the available damage types for a
versatile weapon). No other statistics or traits of the weapon
apply, and even a ranged weapon attacks adjacent creatures
only. Despite making a spell attack, the spiritual weapon is
a weapon for purposes of triggers, resistances, and so forth.
The weapon doesn’t take up space, grant flanking, or have
any other attributes a creature would. The weapon can’t make
any attack other than its Strike, and feats or spells that affect
weapons do not apply to it.
Heightened (+2) The weapon’s damage increases by 1d8.
STABILIZE CANTRIP 1
CANTRIP HEALING NECROMANCY POSITIVE
Traditions divine, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 dying creature
Positive energy shuts death’s door. The target loses the dying
condition, though it remains unconscious at 0 Hit Points.
STATUS SPELL 2
DETECTION DIVINATION
Traditions divine, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 willing living creature
Duration 1 day
As long as you and the target are on the same plane of
existence and both alive, you remain aware of its present
state. You know the target’s direction from you, distance from
you, and any conditions affecting it.
Heightened (4th) The spell’s range increases to 30 feet, and
you can target up to 10 creatures.
STINKING CLOUD SPELL 3
CONJURATION POISON
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Area 20-foot burst
Saving Throw Fortitude; Duration 1 minute
You create a cloud of putrid mist in the area. The cloud
functions as obscuring mist (page 355) except it sickens
creatures that end their turns within the cloud. (The concealed
condition is not a poison effect.)
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature is sickened 1.
Failure The creature is sickened 1 and slowed 1 while in the cloud.
Critical Failure The creature is sickened 2 and slowed 1 until
it leaves the cloud.
373
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
STONE TELL SPELL 6
UNCOMMON EVOCATION EARTH
Traditions divine, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 10 minutes
You can ask questions of and receive answers from natural or
worked stone. While stone is not intelligent, you speak with the
natural spirits of the stone, which have a personality colored by
the type of stone, as well as by the type of structure the stone is
part of, for worked stone. A stone’s perspective, perception, and
knowledge give it a worldview different enough from a human’s
that it doesn’t consider the same details important. Stones can
mostly answer questions about creatures that touched them in
the past and what is concealed beneath or behind them.
STONE TO FLESH SPELL 6
EARTH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions divine, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets petrified creature or human-size stone object
Manipulating the fundamental particles of matter, you convert
stone into flesh and blood. You restore a petrified creature to
its normal state or transform a stone object into a mass of inert
flesh (without stone’s Hardness) in roughly the same shape.
STONESKIN SPELL 4
ABJURATION EARTH
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Duration 20 minutes
The target’s skin hardens like stone. It gains resistance 5 to
physical damage, except adamantine. Each time the target is
hit by a bludgeoning, piercing, or slashing attack, stoneskin’s
duration decreases by 1 minute.
Heightened (6th) The resistance increases to 10.
Heightened (8th) The resistance increases to 15.
Heightened (10th) The resistance increases to 20.
STORM OF VENGEANCE SPELL 9
AIR ELECTRICITY EVOCATION
Traditions primal
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 800 feet; Area 360-foot burst
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
A massive storm cloud forms in the air in a 360-foot burst.
Beneath it, rain begins to fall, and gales impose a –4 circumstance
penalty to physical ranged attacks and weapon ranged attacks,
and the air in the area becomes greater difficult terrain for flying
creatures. When you Cast this Spell and the first time each round
you Sustain the Spell, you can choose one of the following storm
effects. You can’t choose the same effect twice in a row.
• Acid Rain Each creature in the storm takes 4d8 acid
damage with no saving throw.
• Hail The storm deals 4d10 bludgeoning damage to
creatures beneath it (basic Fortitude save).
• Lightning Up to 10 bolts of lightning strike down,
targeting creatures of your choice in the storm. No
more than one bolt can target any one creature. Each
bolt deals 7d6 electricity damage (basic Reflex save).
• Rain and Wind Heavy rain and whipping wind reduce
visibility and mobility, making the area under the
storm cloud difficult terrain and making everything
seen within or through the area concealed.
• Thunderclap Each creature in the storm must succeed
at a Fortitude save or be deafened for 10 minutes.
A creature that succeeds is temporarily immune to
thunderclaps from storm of vengeance for 1 hour.
Heightened (10th) The range increases to 2,200 feet, and the
cloud is a 1,000-foot burst.
SUBCONSCIOUS SUGGESTION SPELL 5
ENCHANTMENT INCAPACITATION LINGUISTIC MENTAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration varies
You implant a subconscious suggestion deep within the target’s
mind for them to follow when a trigger you specify occurs (as
described on page 305). You suggest a course of action to the
target. Your directive must be phrased in such a way as to seem
like a logical course of action to the target, and it can’t be selfdestructive or obviously against the target’s self-interest. The
target must attempt a Will save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected and knows you tried
to control it.
Success The target is unaffected and thinks you were talking
to them normally, not casting a spell on them.
Failure The suggestion remains in the target’s subconscious
until the next time you prepare. If the trigger occurs before
then, the target immediately follows your suggestion. The
effect has a duration of 1 minute, or until the target has
completed a finite suggestion or the suggestion becomes
self-destructive or has other obvious negative effects.
Critical Failure As failure, but the duration is 1 hour.
Heightened (9th) You can target up to 10 creatures.
SUGGESTION SPELL 4
ENCHANTMENT INCAPACITATION LINGUISTIC MENTAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration varies
Your honeyed words are difficult for creatures to resist. You
suggest a course of action to the target, which must be
phrased in such a way as to seem like a logical course of action
to the target and can’t be self-destructive or obviously against
the target’s self-interest. The target must attempt a Will save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected and knows you tried
to control it.
Success The target is unaffected and thinks you were talking
to them normally, not casting a spell on them.
Core Rulebook
374
Failure The target immediately follows your suggestion. The
spell has a duration of 1 minute, or until the target has
completed a finite suggestion or the suggestion becomes
self-destructive or has other obvious negative effects.
Critical Failure As failure, but the base duration is 1 hour.
Heightened (8th) You can target up to 10 creatures.
SUMMON ANIMAL SPELL 1
CONJURATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You conjure an animal to fight for you. You summon a common
creature that has the animal trait and whose level is –1.
Heightening the spell increases the maximum level of creature
you can summon.
Heightened (2nd) Level 1.
Heightened (3rd) Level 2.
Heightened (4th) Level 3.
Heightened (5th) Level 5.
Heightened (6th) Level 7.
Heightened (7th) Level 9.
Heightened (8th) Level 11.
Heightened (9th) Level 13.
Heightened (10th) Level 15.
SUMMON CELESTIAL SPELL 5
CONJURATION
Traditions divine
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You conjure a celestial to fight on your behalf. This works like
summon animal, except you summon a common creature that has
the celestial trait and whose level is 5 or lower. You can’t summon
a creature unless its alignment is one of your deity’s preferred
alignments (or, if you don’t have a deity, is within one step of your
alignment). At the GM’s discretion, some deities might restrict
specific types of celestials, even if their alignments match.
Heightened As summon animal.
SUMMON CONSTRUCT SPELL 1
CONJURATION
Traditions arcane
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You conjure a construct to fight for you. This works like
summon animal, except you summon a common creature that
has the construct trait and whose level is –1.
Heightened As summon animal.
SUMMON DRAGON SPELL 5
CONJURATION
Traditions arcane
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You conjure a dragon to fight for you. This works like summon
animal, except you summon a common creature that has the
dragon trait and whose level is 5 or lower.
Heightened As summon animal.
SUMMON ELEMENTAL SPELL 2
CONJURATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You conjure an elemental to fight for you. This works like
summon animal, except you summon a common creature that
has the elemental trait and whose level is 1 or lower.
Heightened As summon animal.
SUMMON ENTITY SPELL 5
CONJURATION
Traditions occult
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You conjure an aberration to fight for you. This works like
summon animal, except you summon a common creature that
has the aberration trait and whose level is 5 or lower.
Heightened As summon animal.
SUMMON FEY SPELL 1
CONJURATION
Traditions occult, primal
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You conjure a fey to fight for you. This works like summon
animal, except you summon a common creature that has the
fey trait and whose level is –1.
Heightened As summon animal.
SUMMON FIEND SPELL 5
CONJURATION
Traditions divine
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You conjure a fiend to fight on your behalf. This works like
summon animal, except you summon a common creature that
has the fiend trait and whose level is 5 or lower. You can’t
summon a creature unless its alignment is one of your deity’s
preferred alignments (or, if you don’t have a deity, is within
one step of your alignment). At the GM’s discretion, some
deities might restrict specific types of fiends, even if their
alignments match.
Heightened As summon animal.
375
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SUMMON GIANT SPELL 5
CONJURATION
Traditions primal
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You conjure a giant to fight for you. This works like summon
animal (page 375), except you summon a common creature
that has the giant trait and whose level is 5 or lower.
Heightened As summon animal.
SUMMON PLANT OR FUNGUS SPELL 1
CONJURATION
Traditions primal
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You conjure a plant or fungus to fight for you. This works like
summon animal (page 375), except you summon a common
creature that has the plant or fungus trait and whose level is –1.
Heightened As summon animal.
SUNBURST SPELL 7
EVOCATION FIRE LIGHT POSITIVE
Traditions divine, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 500 feet; Area 60-foot burst
Saving Throw Reflex
A powerful globe of searing sunlight explodes in the area,
dealing 8d10 fire damage to creatures and objects in the
area, plus 8d10 additional positive damage to undead
creatures. Each creature and object in the area must
attempt a Reflex save.
Critical Success The creature or object is unaffected.
Success The creature or object takes half damage.
Failure The creature or object takes full damage.
Critical Failure The creature or object takes full damage. If it’s
a creature, it becomes blinded permanently.
If the globe overlaps with an area of magical darkness,
sunburst attempts to counteract the darkness effect.
Heightened (+1) The fire damage increases by 1d10, and the
positive damage against undead increases by 1d10.
SYNAPTIC PULSE SPELL 5
ENCHANTMENT INCAPACITATION MENTAL
Traditions occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Area 30-foot emanation
Saving Throw Will; Duration 1 round
You emit a pulsating mental blast that penetrates the minds of
all enemies in the area. Each creature in the area must attempt
a Will save.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature is stunned 1.
Failure The creature is stunned 2.
Critical Failure The creature is stunned for 1 round.
SYNESTHESIA SPELL 5
DIVINATION MENTAL
Traditions occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration 1 minute
The target’s senses are suddenly rewired in unexpected ways,
causing them to process noises as bursts of color, smells as
sounds, and so on. This has three effects, and the target must
attempt a Will save.
• Due to the distraction, the target must succeed at a DC
5 flat check each time it uses a concentrate action, or
the action fails and is wasted.
• The target’s difficulty processing visual input makes all
creatures and objects concealed from it.
• The creature has trouble moving, making it clumsy 3 and
giving it a –10-foot status penalty to its Speeds.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target is affected for 1 round.
Failure The target is affected for 1 minute.
Critical Failure As failure, and the target is stunned 2 as it
attempts to process the sensory shifts.
Heightened (9th) You can target up to five creatures.
TALKING CORPSE SPELL 4
UNCOMMON NECROMANCY
Traditions divine, occult
Cast 10 minutes (material, somatic, verbal)
Range touch; Targets 1 corpse
Saving Throw Will; Duration 10 minutes
You grant the target corpse a semblance of life, which it uses
to speak the answers to three questions posed to it. This
spell calls on the physical body’s latent memories rather than
summoning back the deceased’s spirit, so the corpse must
be mostly intact for the spell to function. The more damage
the corpse has taken, the more inaccurate or patchwork its
answers are, and it must have a throat and mouth to speak
at all. If anyone has previously cast this spell on the corpse
in the last week, the spell automatically fails. The corpse can
attempt a Will save to resist answering the questions using
the statistics of the original creature at its time of death,
with the following effects.
Critical Success The target can lie or refuse to answer your
questions, and the target’s spirit haunts you for 24 hours,
bothering you and causing you to be unable to gain any rest
for that time.
Success The target can provide false information or refuse
to answer your questions.
Failure The target must answer truthfully, but its answers can
be brief, cryptic, and repetitive. It can still mislead you or
attempt to stall so that the spell’s duration runs out before
you can ask all your questions.
Critical Failure As failure, but the target’s answers are
more direct and less repetitive, though still cryptic. It
takes a –2 status penalty to Deception checks to deceive
or mislead you.
Core Rulebook
376
TANGLEFOOT CANTRIP 1
CANTRIP CONJURATION PLANT
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
A vine covered in sticky sap appears from thin air, flicking
from your hand and lashing itself to the target. Attempt a spell
attack against the target.
Critical Success The target gains the immobilized condition
and takes a –10-foot circumstance penalty to its Speeds for
1 round. It can attempt to Escape against your spell DC to
remove the penalty and the immobilized condition.
Success The target takes a –10-foot circumstance penalty to
its Speeds for 1 round. It can attempt to Escape against your
spell DC to remove the penalty.
Failure The target is unaffected.
Heightened (2nd) The effects last for 2 rounds.
Heightened (4th) The effects last for 1 minute.
TANGLING CREEPERS SPELL 6
CONJURATION PLANT
Traditions primal
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 500 feet; Area 40-foot burst
Duration 10 minutes
Dense, twitching creepers sprout from every surface and fill
any bodies of water in the area. Any creature moving on the
land, or Climbing or Swimming within the creepers, takes a –10-
foot circumstance penalty to its Speeds while in the area. Once
per round, you can make a vine lash out from any square within
the expanse of creepers by using a single action, which has the
concentrate trait. This vine has a 15-foot reach and makes a
melee unarmed attack using your spell attack modifier. If the
attack succeeds, the vine pulls the target into the creepers and
makes it immobilized for 1 round or until the creature Escapes
(against your spell DC), whichever comes first.
TELEKINETIC HAUL SPELL 5
EVOCATION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Targets 1 object of up to 80 Bulk with no
dimension longer than 20 feet
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You move the target up to 20 feet, potentially suspending it
in midair. When you Sustain the Spell, you can do so again, or
you can choose a different eligible target to move.
TELEKINETIC MANEUVER SPELL 2
ATTACK EVOCATION FORCE
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 60 feet; Targets 1 creature
With a rush of telekinetic power, you move a foe or something
they carry. You can attempt to Disarm, Shove, or Trip the
target using a spell attack roll instead of an Athletics check.
TELEKINETIC PROJECTILE CANTRIP 1
ATTACK CANTRIP EVOCATION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
You hurl a loose, unattended object that is within range and
that has 1 Bulk or less at the target. Make a ranged attack
against the target. If you hit, you deal bludgeoning, piercing,
or slashing damage—as appropriate for the object you
hurled—equal to 1d6 plus your spellcasting ability modifier.
No specific traits or magic properties of the hurled item
affect the attack or the damage.
Critical Success You deal double damage.
Success You deal full damage.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d6.
TELEPATHIC BOND SPELL 5
UNCOMMON DIVINATION MENTAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast 1 minute (material, somatic, verbal)
Range touch; Targets you and up to 4 willing creatures
touched
Duration 8 hours
The targets can communicate telepathically with any or all of
the other targets from any point on the same planet.
TELEPATHIC DEMAND SPELL 9
ENCHANTMENT INCAPACITATION LINGUISTIC MENTAL
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range planetary; Targets 1 creature you’ve telepathically
contacted before
Saving Throw Will; Duration varies
You send the target a message of 25 words or fewer, and it
can respond immediately with its own message of 25 words
or fewer. Your message is insidious and has the effect of
suggestion (page 374), with the message substituting for
the spoken suggestion. On a successful save, the target is
temporarily immune for 1 day, and on a critical success, the
target is temporarily immune for 1 month. You can target a
creature only if you have previously been in telepathic contact
with it before, such as via the telepathy spell.
TELEPATHY SPELL 4
DIVINATION LINGUISTIC MENTAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 10 minutes
You can communicate telepathically with creatures within
30 feet. Once you establish a connection by communicating
with a creature, the communication is two-way. You can
communicate only with creatures that share a language
with you.
Heightened (6th) Telepathy loses the linguistic trait. You
can communicate telepathically with creatures using shared
mental imagery even if you don’t share a language.
377
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
TELEPORT SPELL 6
UNCOMMON CONJURATION TELEPORTATION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast 10 minutes (material, somatic, verbal)
Range 100 miles; Targets you and up to 4 targets touched, either
willing creatures or objects roughly the size of a creature.
You and the targets are instantly transported to any location
within range, as long as you can identify the location precisely
both by its position relative to your starting position and
by its appearance (or other identifying features). Incorrect
knowledge of the location’s appearance usually causes the
spell to fail, but it could instead lead to teleporting to an
unwanted location or some other unusual mishap determined
by the GM. Teleport is not precise over great distances. The
targets appear at a distance from the intended destination
equal to roughly 1 percent of the total distance traveled, in a
direction determined by the GM. For short journeys, this lack
of precision is irrelevant, but for long distances this could be
up to 1 mile.
Heightened (7th) You and the other targets can travel to any
location within 1,000 miles.
Heightened (8th) You and the other targets can travel to any
location on the same planet. If you travel more than 1,000
miles, you arrive only 10 miles off target.
Heightened (9th) You and the other targets can travel to any
location on another planet within the same solar system.
Assuming you have accurate knowledge of the location’s
position and appearance, you arrive on the new planet 100
miles off target.
Heightened (10th) As the 9th-level version, but you and the
other targets can travel to any planet within the same galaxy.
TIME STOP SPELL 10
TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
You temporarily stop time for everything but yourself, allowing
you to use several actions in what appears to others to be no
time at all. Immediately after casting time stop, you can use up
to 9 actions in 3 sets of up to 3 actions each. After each set
of actions, 1 round passes, but only for you, effects specifically
targeting or affecting you, and effects you create during the
stoppage. All other creatures and objects are invulnerable to
your attacks, and you can’t target or affect them with anything.
Once you have finished your actions, time begins to flow again
for the rest of the world. If you created an effect with a duration
that extends beyond the time stop’s duration, such as wall of
fire, it immediately affects others again, but it doesn’t have any
of the effects that happen only when you first cast the spell.
TONGUES SPELL 5
UNCOMMON DIVINATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Duration 1 hour
The target can understand all words regardless of language and
also speak the languages of other creatures. When in a mixed
group of creatures, each time the target speaks, it can choose
a creature and speak in a language that creature understands,
even if the target doesn’t know what language that is.
Heightened (7th) The duration is 8 hours.
TOUCH OF IDIOCY SPELL 2
ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 living creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration 1 minute
You dull the target’s mind; the target must attempt a Will save.
Success The target is unaffected.
Failure The target is stupefied 2.
Critical Failure The target is stupefied 4.
TREE SHAPE SPELL 2
PLANT POLYMORPH TRANSMUTATION
Traditions primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 8 hours
You transform into a Large tree. Perception checks don’t
reveal your true nature, but a successful Nature or Survival
check against your spell DC reveals that you appear to be a
tree that is strangely new to the area. While in tree form, you
can observe everything around you, but you can’t act other
than to end the spell, and your turn, by using a single action,
which has the concentrate trait. As a tree, your AC is 20, and
only status bonuses, status penalties, circumstance bonuses,
and circumstance penalties affect you. Any successes and
critical successes you roll on Reflex saves are failures.
TREE STRIDE SPELL 5
UNCOMMON CONJURATION PLANT TELEPORTATION
Traditions primal
Cast 1 minute (material, somatic, verbal)
You step into a living tree with a trunk big enough for you
to fit inside it and instantly teleport to any tree of the same
species within 5 miles that also has a sufficiently large trunk.
Once you enter the first tree, you instantly know the rough
locations of other sufficiently large trees of the same species
within range and can exit from the original tree, if you prefer.
You can’t carry extradimensional spaces with you; if you
attempt to do so, the spell fails.
Heightened (6th) The tree you exit can be up to 50 miles away.
Heightened (8th) The tree you exit can be up to 500 miles away.
Heightened (9th) The tree you exit can be anywhere on the
same planet.
TRUE SEEING SPELL 6
DIVINATION REVELATION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 10 minutes
Core Rulebook
378
You see things within 60 feet as they actually are. The GM rolls
a secret counteract check against any illusion or transmutation
in the area, but only for the purpose of determining whether
you see through it (for instance, if the check succeeds against
a polymorph spell, you can see the creature’s true form, but
you don’t end the polymorph spell).
TRUE STRIKE SPELL 1
DIVINATION FORTUNE
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast [one-action] verbal
Duration until the end of your turn
A glimpse into the future ensures your next blow strikes true.
The next time you make an attack roll before the end of your
turn, roll the attack twice and use the better result. The attack
ignores circumstance penalties to the attack roll and any flat
check required due to the target being concealed or hidden.
TRUE TARGET SPELL 7
DIVINATION FORTUNE PREDICTION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast [one-action] verbal
Range 60 feet; Targets 1 creature
Duration until the start of your next turn
You delve into the possible futures of the next few seconds to
understand all the ways your target might avoid harm, then
cast out a vision of that future to those around you. On the first
attack roll made against the target during true target’s duration,
the attacker rolls twice and uses the better result. The attacker
also ignores circumstance penalties to the attack roll and any
flat check required due to the target being concealed or hidden.
UNCONTROLLABLE DANCE SPELL 8
ENCHANTMENT INCAPACITATION MENTAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration varies
The target is overcome with an all-consuming urge to dance.
For the duration of the spell, the target is flat-footed and can’t
use reactions. While affected, the creature can’t use actions
with the move trait except to dance, using the Stride action to
move up to half its Speed.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The spell’s duration is 3 rounds, and the target must
spend at least 1 action each turn dancing.
Failure The spell’s duration is 1 minute, and the target must
spend at least 2 actions each turn dancing.
Critical Failure The spell’s duration is 1 minute, and the target
must spend all its actions each turn dancing.
UNDETECTABLE ALIGNMENT SPELL 2
UNCOMMON ABJURATION
Traditions divine, occult
Cast 1 minute (material, somatic, verbal)
Range touch; Targets 1 creature or object
Duration until the next time you make your daily preparations
You shroud a creature in wards that hide its alignment. The
target appears to be neutral to all effects that would detect
its alignment.
UNFATHOMABLE SONG SPELL 9
AUDITORY EMOTION ENCHANTMENT FEAR INCAPACITATION MENTAL
Traditions occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Targets up to 5 creatures
Saving Throw Will; Duration sustained up to 1 minute
Fleeting notes of a strange and unnatural song fill the air,
overtaking the mind. Each target must attempt a Will save
when you cast the spell, and again each time you Sustain the
Spell. A creature needs to attempt only one save against the
song each round, and you have to keep the same targets when
you Sustain the Spell.
Critical Success The target is unaffected, can’t be affected on
subsequent rounds, and is temporarily immune for 1 minute.
Success The target is unaffected this round, but it can be
affected on subsequent rounds.
Failure Roll 1d4 on the table below.
Critical Failure Roll 1d4+1 on the table below.
Result Effect
1 The target is frightened 2.
2 The target is confused for 1 round.
3 The target is stupefied 4 for 1 round.
4 The target is blinded for 1 round.
5 The target is stunned for 1 round and stupefied 1 for
an unlimited duration.
UNFETTERED PACK SPELL 7
ABJURATION
Traditions primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets up to 10 creatures
Duration 1 hour
You free those who travel alongside you from environmental
hindrances. Targets don’t take circumstance penalties to
Speed from vegetation, rubble, winds, or other properties
of the environment, whether or not the environment
is magical, and they ignore difficult terrain from such
environmental properties.
Heightened (9th) The targets also ignore greater difficult
terrain from environmental properties.
UNRELENTING OBSERVATION SPELL 8
DIVINATION SCRYING
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 100 feet; Area 20-foot burst; Targets 1 creature or
object tracked and up to 5 other willing creatures
Duration varies
This spell grants perfect sight based on scrying, allowing
several willing targets to track the exact movements or
379
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
position of one creature or object. Choose one target creature
or object in the area to be tracked. It becomes the sensor for
the spell. Up to five willing creatures of your choice in the
area can see a ghostly image of this creature or object when
it’s out of their sight. They can perceive the creature or object
perfectly, allowing them to ignore the concealed or invisible
condition, though physical barriers still provide cover.
The tracking creatures can see the tracked creature or
object through all barriers other than lead or running water,
which block their vision. Distance doesn’t matter, though the
creature or object might move so far away it becomes too
small to perceive. The tracking creatures don’t see any of the
environment around the target, though they do see any gear a
creature is wearing or holding, and they can tell if it removes
objects from its person.
If the target to be tracked is willing, the duration is 1 hour. If
you try to track an unwilling creature, the target must attempt
a Will save.
Critical Success The creature or object is unaffected.
Success As described, and the duration is 1 minute.
Failure As described, and the duration is 1 hour.
UNSEEN SERVANT SPELL 1
CONJURATION
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 60 feet
Duration sustained
You summon an unseen servant (see the sidebar), which
you can command as part of Sustaining the Spell. It serves
you until its Hit Points are reduced to 0, at which point the
spell ends, or until you stop Sustaining the Spell. The unseen
servant gains the summoned trait.
UNSEEN SERVANT
Use this stat block for an unseen servant.
UNSEEN SERVANT CREATURE –1
MEDIUM MINDLESS
Perception +0; darkvision
Languages — (understands its creator)
Skills Stealth +8
Str –4, Dex +2, Con +0, Int –5, Wis +0, Cha +0
Invisible An unseen servant is invisible, though it
normally doesn’t Sneak, so it is usually only hidden.
AC 13; Fort +0, Ref +4, Will +0
HP 4; Immunities disease, mental, non-magical attacks,
paralysis, poison, precision, unconscious; Resistances
all damage 5 (except force or ghost touch)
Speed fly 30 feet
Force Body An unseen servant’s physical body is made
of force. It can’t use attack actions. It can move and
use Interact actions to do things such as fetch objects,
open unstuck or unlocked doors, hold chairs, and
clean. It can’t pass through solid objects.
VAMPIRIC EXSANGUINATION SPELL 6
DEATH NECROMANCY NEGATIVE
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 30-foot cone
Saving Throw basic Fortitude
You draw in the blood and life force of other creatures through
your outstretched arms. You deal 12d6 negative damage to
living creatures in the area.
You gain temporary Hit Points equal to half the damage
a single creature takes from this spell; calculate these
temporary Hit Points using the creature that took the most
damage. You lose any remaining temporary Hit Points after
1 minute.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d6.
VAMPIRIC TOUCH SPELL 3
DEATH NECROMANCY NEGATIVE
Traditions arcane, divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 living creature
Saving Throw basic Fortitude
Your touch leeches the lifeblood out of a target to empower
yourself. You deal 6d6 negative damage to the target. You gain
temporary Hit Points equal to half the negative damage the
target takes (after applying resistances and the like). You lose
any remaining temporary Hit Points after 1 minute.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d6.
VEIL SPELL 4
ILLUSION VISUAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets up to 10 creatures
Duration 1 hour
You disguise the targets as other creatures of the same
body shape and roughly similar height (within 6 inches) and
weight (within 50 pounds). The disguise can hide the targets’
identities or let them appear to be of another ancestry, but
it’s not precise enough to impersonate specific individuals. The
spell doesn’t change voice, scent, or mannerisms. You choose
the disguise for each target; for example, you could make one
target appear to be a dwarf and another an elf.
Casting veil counts as setting up a disguise for the purpose
of the Impersonate action. It allows the target to ignore any
circumstance penalties they might take for being disguised as
dissimilar creatures, and it gives the targets a +4 status bonus
to Deception checks to prevent others from seeing through
their disguises, and add their level even if untrained. You can
Dismiss any or all of these disguises.
Heightened (5th) The spell also disguises the targets’ voices
and scents; it gains the auditory trait.
Heightened (7th) The targets can appear as any creature of the
same size, even specific individuals. You must have seen an
individual to reproduce their appearance. The spell also disguises
the targets’ voices and scents; it gains the auditory trait.
Core Rulebook
380
VENTRILOQUISM SPELL 1
AUDITORY ILLUSION
Traditions arcane, divine, occult, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 10 minutes
Whenever you speak or make any other sound vocally, you
can make your vocalization seem to originate from somewhere
else within 60 feet, and you can change that apparent location
freely as you vocalize. Any creature that hears the sound can
attempt to disbelieve your illusion.
Heightened (2nd) The spell’s duration increases to 1 hour,
and you can also change the tone, quality, and other aspects
of your  voice. Before a creature can attempt to disbelieve
your illusion, it must actively attempt a Perception check or
otherwise use actions to interact with the sound.
VIBRANT PATTERN SPELL 6
ILLUSION INCAPACITATION VISUAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] material, somatic
Range 120 feet; Area 10-foot burst
Saving Throw Will; Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You create a pattern of lights that pulses with intensity.
Creatures are dazzled while inside the pattern.
In addition, a creature must attempt a Will saving throw
if it’s inside the pattern when you cast it, enters the pattern,
ends its turn within the pattern, or uses a Seek or Interact
action on the pattern. A creature currently blinded by the
pattern doesn’t need to attempt new saving throws.
Success The creature is unaffected.
Failure The creature is blinded by the pattern. If it exits
the pattern, it can attempt a new save to recover from
the blinded condition at the end of each of its turns, to a
maximum duration of 1 minute.
Critical Failure The creature is blinded for 1 minute.
VISIONS OF DANGER SPELL 7
AUDITORY ILLUSION VISUAL
Traditions occult
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 500 feet; Area 30-foot burst
Saving Throw Will; Duration 1 minute
An illusion of horrific creatures fills the spell’s area. The
creatures look like Tiny swarming monsters with a specific
appearance of your choice, such as Hellish flies or animated
saw blades. The burst deals 8d8 mental damage to each
creature that’s inside the burst when it’s created, enters
the burst, or starts its turn inside the burst. A creature that
critically succeeds at its will save can immediately attempt to
disbelieve the illusion. A creature that tries to Interact with
the monsters or observes one with a Seek action can attempt
to disbelieve the illusion. Creatures that disbelieve the illusion
take no damage from the illusion thereafter.
Heightened (+1) The mental damage increases by 1d8.
381
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
VITAL BEACON SPELL 4
HEALING NECROMANCY POSITIVE
Traditions divine, primal
Cast 1 minute (somatic, verbal)
Duration until your next daily preparations
Vitality radiates outward from you, allowing others to
supplicate and receive healing. Once per round, either you
or an ally can use an Interact action to supplicate and lay
hands upon you to regain Hit Points. Each time the beacon
heals someone, it decreases in strength. It restores 4d10 Hit
Points to the first creature, 4d8 Hit Points to the second, 4d6
Hit Points to the third, and 4d4 Hit Points to the fourth, after
which the spell ends. You can have only one vital beacon
active at a time.
Heightened (+1) The beacon restores one additional die of Hit
Points each time it heals, using the same die size as the others
for that step.
VOLCANIC ERUPTION SPELL 7
EVOCATION FIRE
Traditions primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Area 5-foot radius, 80-foot-tall cylinder
Saving Throw Reflex
The ground opens up, spraying a column of lava high into the
air in a vertical cylinder, dealing 14d6 fire damage to creatures
in the area. The lava rapidly cools and encases creatures in
the area. A creature encased in rock is clumsy 1 and takes
a –10-foot status penalty to its Speeds. All normal terrain
is difficult terrain to a flying creature, and such creatures
immediately descend 20 feet the moment they’re encased,
but they don’t take damage from this fall. A creature encased
in rock can attempt to Escape against your spell DC to end the
effect. Otherwise, the creature remains encased until it takes
a total of 50 damage, freeing it from the rock.
Additionally, creatures in the area and those within 5 feet of
the lava column automatically take 3d6 fire damage from the
intense heat, regardless of the results of their saving throws.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature takes half damage.
Failure The creature takes full damage and is encased.
Critical Failure The creature takes double damage and is
encased.
Heightened (+1) The damage in the area increases by 2d6, and
the damage from the intense heat increases by 1d6.
WAIL OF THE BANSHEE SPELL 9
AUDITORY DEATH NECROMANCY NEGATIVE
Traditions divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 40-foot emanation; Targets any number of creatures
Saving Throw Fortitude
Your scream chills the souls of enemies that hear it. Each
living enemy in the area takes 8d10 negative damage and
must attempt a Fortitude save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target takes full damage.
Failure The target takes full damage and is drained 1d4.
Critical Failure The target takes double damage and is drained 4.
WALL OF FIRE SPELL 4
EVOCATION FIRE
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet
Duration 1 minute
You raise a blazing wall that burns creatures passing through
it. You create either a 5-foot-thick wall of flame in a straight
line up to 60 feet long and 10 feet high, or a 5-foot-thick,
10-foot-radius ring of flame with the same height. The wall
stands vertically in either form; if you wish, the wall can be of
a shorter length or height. Everything on each side of the wall
is concealed from creatures on the opposite side. Any creature
that crosses the wall or is occupying the wall’s area at the
start of its turn takes 4d6 fire damage.
Heightened (+1) The fire damage increases by 1d6.
WALL OF FORCE SPELL 6
EVOCATION FORCE
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet
Duration 1 minute
You form an invisible wall of pure magical force up to 50
feet long and up to 20 feet high. The wall has no discernible
thickness. You must create the wall in an unbroken open space
so its edges don’t pass through any creatures or objects, or
the spell is lost. The wall has AC 10, Hardness 30, and 60 Hit
Points, and it’s immune to critical hits and precision damage.
The wall blocks physical effects from passing through it, and
because it’s made of force, it blocks incorporeal and ethereal
creatures as well. Teleportation effects can pass through the
barrier, as can visual effects (since the wall is invisible).
Wall of force is immune to counteracting effects of its
level or lower, but the wall is automatically destroyed by
a disintegrate spell of any level or by contact with a rod of
cancellation or sphere of annihilation.
Heightened (+2) The Hit Points of the wall increases by 20.
WALL OF ICE SPELL 5
COLD EVOCATION WATER
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet
Duration 1 minute
You sculpt a barrier of ice that blocks sight and, once shattered,
freezes foes. You create either a 1-foot-thick wall of ice in a
straight line up to 60 feet long and 10 feet high (the wall doesn’t
have to be vertical, but it must be anchored on both sides to a
solid surface) or a 1-foot-thick, 10-foot radius hemisphere of ice.
The ice that makes up the wall is opaque. If you wish, the wall
can be of a smaller length, height, or radius. You must create the
Core Rulebook
382
wall in an unbroken open space so its edges don’t pass through
any creatures or objects, or the spell is lost.
Each 10-foot-by-10-foot section of the wall has AC 10,
Hardness 10, and 40 Hit Points, and it’s immune to critical
hits, cold damage, and precision damage. A section also has
weakness to fire 15; a section of the wall destroyed by fire
melts, evaporating into water and steam. A section destroyed
by means other than fire leaves behind a chilling mass of ice
that is difficult terrain and deals 2d6 cold damage to any
creature passing through it.
Heightened (+2) The Hit Points of each section of the wall
increase by 10, and the cold damage dealt to creatures
crossing a destroyed section increases by 1d6.
WALL OF STONE SPELL 5
CONJURATION EARTH
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet
You shape a wall of solid stone. You create a 1-inch-thick wall
of stone up to 120 feet long, and 20 feet high. You can shape
the wall’s path, placing each 5 feet of the wall on the border
between squares. The wall doesn’t need to stand vertically, so
you can use it to form a bridge or set of stairs, for example. You
must conjure the wall in an unbroken open space so its edges
don’t pass through any creatures or objects, or the spell is lost.
Each 5-foot-by-5-foot section of the wall has AC 10, Hardness
14, and 50 Hit Points, and it’s immune to critical hits and
precision damage. A destroyed section of the wall can be moved
through, but the rubble created from it is difficult terrain.
Heightened (+2) The Hit Points of each section of the wall
increase by 15.
WALL OF THORNS SPELL 3
CONJURATION PLANT
Traditions primal
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 60 feet
Duration 1 minute
Over the course of a minute, you cause a thick wall of thorny
brambles to grow from the ground. You create a 5-footthick wall of brambles and thorns in a straight line up to
60 feet long and 10 feet high. You must create the wall in
an unbroken open space so its edges don’t pass through
any creatures or objects, or the spell is lost. The wall stands
vertically. If you wish, the wall can be of a shorter length or
height. Everything on each side of the wall has cover from
creatures on the opposite side, and the wall’s spaces are
difficult terrain. For every move action a creature uses to
enter at least one of the wall’s spaces, that creature takes
3d4 piercing damage.
Each 5-foot-by-5-foot section of the wall has AC 10, Hardness
10, and 20 Hit Points. It’s immune to critical hits and precision
damage. A destroyed section can be moved through freely.
Heightened (+1) The Hit Points of each section of the wall
increase by 5, and the piercing damage increases by 1d4.
WALL OF WIND SPELL 3
AIR EVOCATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet
Duration 1 minute
You create a barrier of gusting winds that hinders anything
moving through it. The wall of swirling winds is 5 feet
thick, 60 feet long, and 30 feet high. The wall stands
vertically, but you can shape its path. Though the wall of
wind distorts the air, it does not hamper sight. The wall has
the following effects.
• Ammunition from physical ranged attacks—such
as arrows, bolts, sling bullets, and other objects of
similar size—can’t pass through the wall. Attacks with
bigger ranged weapons, such as javelins, take a –2
circumstance penalty to their attack rolls if their paths
pass through the wall. Massive ranged weapons and
spell effects that don’t create physical objects pass
through the wall with no penalty.
• The wall is difficult terrain to creatures attempting to
move overland through it. Gases, including creatures
in gaseous form, can’t pass through the wall.
• A creature that attempts to fly through the wall using a
move action must attempt a Fortitude save.
Critical Success The creature can move through the wall
normally this turn.
Success The flying creature can move through the wall this
turn, but the wall is difficult terrain.
Failure The wall stops the movement of the flying creature, and
any remaining movement from its current action is wasted.
Critical Failure As failure, and the creature is pushed 10 feet
away from the wall.
WANDERER’S GUIDE SPELL 3
DIVINATION
Tradition divine, occult
Cast 1 minute (material, somatic, verbal)
Duration until your next daily preparations
You call upon the beyond to guide your route. When you
Cast this Spell, choose a destination; you receive an inspired
route to that destination, allowing you and allies who travel
overland with you to reduce the movement penalty from
difficult terrain by half for the duration, as long as you don’t
deviate from the inspired route. This doesn’t have any effect
on movement during encounters. If you use this ability again
before the duration is over, this effect ends and is replaced by
that of the new route.
WARP MIND SPELL 7
EMOTION ENCHANTMENT INCAPACITATION MENTAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will
You scramble a creature’s mental faculties and sensory input.
383
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
The target must attempt a Will saving throw. Regardless of
the result of that save, the target is then temporarily immune
for 10 minutes. Warp mind’s effects happen instantly, so dispel
magic and other effects that counteract spells can’t counteract
them. However, alter reality, miracle, primal phenomenon,
restoration, or wish can still counteract the effects.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target spends the first action on its next turn
with the confused condition.
Failure The target is confused for 1 minute.
Critical Failure The target is confused permanently.
WATER BREATHING SPELL 2
TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, divine, primal
Cast 1 minute (somatic, verbal)
Range 30 feet; Targets up to 5 creatures
Duration 1 hour
The targets can breathe underwater.
Heightened (3rd) The duration increases to 8 hours.
Heightened (4th) The duration increases to until your next
daily preparations.
WATER WALK SPELL 2
TRANSMUTATION
Traditions arcane, divine, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Duration 10 minutes
The target can walk on the surface of water and other liquids
without falling through. It can go underwater if it wishes, but
in that case it must Swim normally. This spell doesn’t grant the
ability to breathe underwater.
Heightened (4th) The spell’s range increases to 30 feet, the
duration increases to 1 hour, and you can target up to 10 creatures.
WEAPON OF JUDGMENT SPELL 9
EVOCATION FORCE
Traditions divine
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal; Requirements You have a deity.
Range 100 feet; Targets 1 creature
Duration 1 minute
An immense weapon of force appears, hovering in the air above
the target. The weapon has the ghostly visual appearance of
your deity’s favored weapon. Name war or peace when you
cast this spell.
If you name “war,” mentally choose one creature. This must
be a creature both you and the target can see. The target
instinctively knows which creature this is. At the end of each
of the target’s turns, if the target did not use a hostile action
against the creature you chose during that turn, the weapon
Strikes the target.
If you name “peace,” mentally choose up to five allies. The
target instinctively knows who those allies are. The weapon
Strikes the target each time the target uses a hostile action
against you or one of your allies. The weapon Strikes only
once per action, even if the action targets multiple allies (such
as for a fireball or a Whirlwind Strike).
Strikes with the weapon are melee weapon attacks, but they
use your spell attack modifier. Regardless of its appearance,
the weapon deals force damage equal to 3d10 plus your
spellcasting ability modifier. The weapon takes a multiple
attack penalty, which increases throughout the target’s turn,
but its penalty is separate from yours.
When the weapon Strikes, you can deal damage of the
normal damage type of the weapon instead of force damage
(or any of the available damage types, for a versatile weapon).
No other statistics or attributes of the weapon apply, and even
a ranged weapon attacks adjacent creatures only. A weapon of
judgment is a weapon for the purposes of triggers, resistances,
and so forth.
The weapon doesn’t take up space, grant flanking, or have
any other attributes a creature would. The weapon can’t make
any attack other than its Strike, and feats or spells that affect
weapons do not apply to this weapon.
Heightened (10th) The force damage increases by 1d10.
WEAPON STORM SPELL 4
EVOCATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 30-foot cone or 10-foot emanation
Saving Throw Reflex
You swing a weapon you’re holding, and the weapon magically
multiplies into duplicates that swipe at all creatures in either
a cone or an emanation. This flurry deals four dice of damage
to creatures in the area. This damage has the same type as
the weapon and uses the same die size. Determine the die size
as if you were attacking with the weapon; for instance, if you
were wielding a two-hand weapon in both hands, you’d use its
two-hand damage die.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The target takes half damage.
Failure The target takes full damage.
Critical Failure The target takes double damage and is subject
to the weapon’s critical specialization effect.
Heightened (+1) Add another damage die.
WEB SPELL 2
CONJURATION
Traditions arcane, primal
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Area 10-foot burst
Duration 1 minute
You create a sticky web in the area that impedes creatures’
movement each time they try to move through it. Squares
filled with the web are difficult terrain. Each square can be
cleared of the web by a single attack or effect that deals at
least 5 slashing damage or 1 fire damage. A square has AC 5,
and it automatically fails its saving throws.
Each time a creature in the web begins to use a move action
or enters the web during a move action, it must attempt an
Core Rulebook
384
Athletics check or Reflex save against your spell DC to avoid
taking a circumstance penalty to its Speeds or becoming
immobilized. A creature that gets out of the web ceases to
take a circumstance penalty to its Speed from the web.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected, and it doesn’t
need to attempt further Athletics checks or saving throws
against the web this turn. If it used an Athletics check, it
clears the web from every square it leaves after leaving
the square.
Success The creature is unaffected during its action. If it used
an Athletics check, it clears the web from every square it
leaves after leaving the square.
Failure The creature takes a –10-foot circumstance penalty to
its Speeds until the start of its next turn.
Critical Failure The creature is immobilized until the start of
its next turn, after which it takes a –10-foot circumstance
penalty to its Speeds for 1 round. It can attempt to Escape
to remove its immobilized condition.
Heightened (4th) The spell’s area increases to a 20-foot burst,
and its range increases to 60 feet.
WEIRD SPELL 9
DEATH EMOTION FEAR ILLUSION MENTAL
Traditions arcane, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Targets any number of creatures
Saving Throw Will
You fill the targets’ minds with terrifying images of fearsome
creatures, each drawn from the targets’ worst fears. Only the
targets can see their assailants. Each target takes 16d6 mental
damage and must attempt a Will save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target takes half damage and is frightened 1.
Failure The target takes full damage and is frightened 2.
Critical Failure The target is so afraid, it might instantly die.
It must attempt a Fortitude saving throw. If the target
succeeds, it takes double damage and is frightened 2,
and it’s also fleeing until the end of its next turn unless it
critically succeeded. If it fails, it is reduced to 0 Hit Points
and dies.
WIND WALK SPELL 8
AIR TRANSMUTATION
Traditions primal
Cast 10 minutes (material, somatic, verbal)
Range touch; Targets you and up to five creatures touched
Duration 8 hours
When you cast this spell, each target transforms into a
vaguely cloud-like form and is picked up by a wind moving
in the direction of your choice. You can change the wind’s
direction by using a single action, which has the concentrate
trait. The wind carries the targets at a Speed of 20 miles per
hour, but if any of the targets make an attack, Cast a Spell,
come under attack, or otherwise enter encounter mode, the
spell ends for all targets just after they roll initiative, and they
drift gently to the ground.
WISH SPELL 10
DIVINATION
Traditions arcane
Cast[three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
You state a wish, making your greatest desire come true. A
wish spell can produce any one of the following effects.
• Duplicate any arcane spell of 9th level or lower.
• Duplicate any non-arcane spell of 7th level or lower.
• Produce any effect whose power level is in line with
the above effects.
• Reverse certain effects that refer to the wish spell.
The GM might allow you to try using wish to produce
greater effects than these, but doing so might be dangerous
or the spell might have only a partial effect.
ZEALOUS CONVICTION SPELL 6
ENCHANTMENT
Traditions divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets up to 10 willing creatures
Duration 10 minutes
You bypass your targets’ rational minds, instilling them with
unshakable conviction and zeal. The targets each gain 12
temporary Hit Points and a +2 status bonus to Will saves
against mental effects, as their faith overrides the signals from
their own bodies and minds. If you tell a target to do something,
it must comply with your request, though if it would normally
find the task repugnant, it can attempt a Will save at the end
of its turn each round due to the cognitive dissonance. On a
success, it ends the spell’s effects on itself entirely.
Heightened (9th) The temporary Hit Points increase to 18, and
the status bonus to Will saves increases to +3.
ZONE OF TRUTH SPELL 3
UNCOMMON ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Traditions divine, occult
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Area 20-foot burst
Saving Throw Will; Duration 10 minutes
You designate an area in which creatures are compelled
to speak only truth. Creatures within or entering the area
have difficulty lying. Each potentially affected creature
must attempt a Will save when the spell is cast or when the
creature first enters the area. It uses the results of this initial
save if it leaves and reenters the area. Affected creatures
are aware of this enchantment; therefore, they can avoid
answering questions to which they would normally respond
with a lie, or they can be evasive as long as they remain within
the boundaries of the truth.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target takes a –2 status penalty to Deception checks.
Failure The target can’t speak any deliberate and intentional
lies, and it takes a –2 status penalty to Deception checks.
Critical Failure The target can’t speak any deliberate
and intentional lies and takes a –4 status penalty to
Deception checks.
385
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
BARD
Bards can gain the following composition spells. This
section also includes their composition cantrips.
ALLEGRO CANTRIP 7
UNCOMMON BARD CANTRIP COMPOSITION EMOTION ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Cast [one-action] verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 ally
Duration 1 round
You perform rapidly, speeding up your ally. The ally becomes
quickened and can use the additional action to Strike, Stride,
or Step.
COUNTER PERFORMANCE FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON BARD COMPOSITION ENCHANTMENT FORTUNE MENTAL
Cast [reaction] somatic or verbal
Trigger You or an ally within 60 feet rolls a saving throw
against an auditory or visual effect.
Area 60-foot emanation
Your performance protects you and your allies. Roll a
Performance check for a type you know: an auditory
performance if the trigger was auditory, or a visual one for
a visual trigger. You and allies in the area can use the better
result between your Performance check and the saving throw.
DIRGE OF DOOM CANTRIP 3
UNCOMMON BARD CANTRIP COMPOSITION EMOTION ENCHANTMENT
FEAR MENTAL
Cast [one-action] verbal
Area 30-foot emanation
Duration 1 round
Foes within the area are frightened 1. They can’t reduce their
frightened value below 1 while they remain in the area.
FATAL ARIA FOCUS 10
UNCOMMON BARD COMPOSITION DEATH EMOTION ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Cast [one-action] verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
You perform music so perfect that the target may die of joy
or sorrow. Once targeted, the creature becomes temporarily
immune for 1 minute. The effect of the spell depends on the
target’s level and current Hit Points.
16th or Lower The target dies instantly.
17th If the target has 50 Hit Points or fewer, it dies instantly;
otherwise, it drops to 0 Hit Points and becomes dying 1.
18th or Higher The target takes 50 damage. If this brings it to
0 Hit Points, it dies instantly.
HOUSE OF IMAGINARY WALLS CANTRIP 5
UNCOMMON BARD CANTRIP COMPOSITION ILLUSION VISUAL
Cast [one-action] somatic
Range touch
Duration 1 round
You mime creating an invisible 10-foot-by-10-foot stretch of
wall adjacent to you and within your reach. The wall is solid
to those creatures that don’t disbelieve it, even incorporeal
creatures. You and your allies can voluntarily believe the wall
exists to continue to treat it as solid, for instance to climb
onto it. A creature that disbelieves the illusion is temporarily
immune to your house of imaginary walls for 1 minute. The
wall doesn’t block creatures that didn’t see your visual
performance, nor does it block objects. The wall has AC 10,
Hardness equal to double the spell’s level, and HP equal to
quadruple the spell’s level.
INSPIRE COMPETENCE CANTRIP 1
UNCOMMON BARD CANTRIP COMPOSITION EMOTION ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Cast [one-action] verbal
Range 60 feet; Targets 1 ally
Duration 1 round
Your encouragement inspires your ally to succeed at a task.
This counts as having taken sufficient preparatory actions to
Aid your ally on a skill check of your choice, regardless of the
circumstances. When you later use the Aid reaction, you can
roll Performance instead of the normal skill check, and if you
roll a failure, you get a success instead. If you are legendary in
Performance, you automatically critically succeed.
The GM might rule that you can’t use this ability if the act
of encouraging your ally would interfere with the skill check
(such as a check to Sneak quietly or maintain a disguise).
INSPIRE COURAGE CANTRIP 1
UNCOMMON BARD CANTRIP COMPOSITION EMOTION ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Cast [one-action] verbal
Area 60-foot emanation
Duration 1 round
You inspire your allies with words or tunes of encouragement.
You and all allies in the area gain a +1 status bonus to attack
rolls, damage rolls, and saves against fear effects.
INSPIRE DEFENSE CANTRIP 2
UNCOMMON BARD CANTRIP COMPOSITION EMOTION ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Cast [one-action] verbal
Area 60-foot emanation
Duration 1 round
Focus Spells
Some classes gain special spells that they cast using Focus Points instead of spell slots.
These focus spells are listed below, organized by class. The full rules for casting focus
spells appear on page 300.
Core Rulebook
386
You inspire your allies to protect themselves more effectively.
You and all allies in the area gain a +1 status bonus to AC and
saving throws, as well as resistance equal to half the spell’s
level to physical damage.
INSPIRE HEROICS FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON BARD ENCHANTMENT
Cast [free-action] verbal
You call upon your muse to greatly increase the benefits you
provide to your allies with your inspire courage or inspire
defense composition. If your next action is to cast inspire
courage or inspire defense, attempt a Performance check.
The DC is usually a very hard DC of a level equal to that of
the highest-level target of your composition, but the GM can
assign a different DC based on the circumstances. The effect
of your inspire courage or inspire defense composition depends
on the result of your check.
Critical Success The status bonus from your inspire courage or
inspire defense increases to +3.
Success The status bonus from inspire courage or inspire
defense increases to +2.
Failure Your inspire courage or inspire defense provides only
its normal bonus of +1, but you don’t spend the Focus Point
for casting this spell.
LINGERING COMPOSITION FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON BARD ENCHANTMENT
Cast [free-action] verbal
You add a flourish to your composition to extend its benefits.
If your next action is to cast a cantrip composition with a
duration of 1 round, attempt a Performance check. The DC
is usually a standard-difficulty DC of a level equal to the
highest-level target of your composition, but the GM can
assign a different DC based on the circumstances. The effect
depends on the result of your check.
Critical Success The composition lasts 4 rounds.
Success The composition lasts 3 rounds.
Failure The composition lasts 1 round, but you don’t spend the
Focus Point for casting this spell.
LOREMASTER’S ETUDE FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON BARD DIVINATION FORTUNE
Cast [free-action] somatic
Trigger You or an ally within range attempts a skill check to
Recall Knowledge
Range 30 feet; Targets you or the triggering ally
You call upon your muse’s deep mysteries, granting the target a
greater ability to think and recall information. Roll the triggering
Recall Knowledge skill check twice and use the better result.
SOOTHING BALLAD FOCUS 7
UNCOMMON BARD COMPOSITION EMOTION ENCHANTMENT HEALING MENTAL
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets you and up to 9 allies
You draw upon your muse to soothe your allies. Choose one of
the following three effects:
• The spell attempts to counteract fear effects on
the targets.
• The spell attempts to counteract effects imposing
paralysis on the targets.
• The spell restores 7d8 Hit Points to the targets.
Heightened (+1) When used to heal, soothing ballad restores
1d8 more Hit Points.
TRIPLE TIME CANTRIP 2
UNCOMMON BARD CANTRIP COMPOSITION EMOTION ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Cast [one-action] somatic
Area 60-foot emanation
Duration 1 round
You dance at a lively tempo, speeding your allies’ movement.
You and all allies in the area gain a +10-foot status bonus to all
Speeds for 1 round.
CHAMPION
Champions can gain the following devotion spells.
CHAMPION’S SACRIFICE FOCUS 6
UNCOMMON ABJURATION CHAMPION
Cast [reaction] somatic
Trigger An ally is hit by a Strike, or an ally fails a saving throw
against an effect that doesn’t affect you.
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 ally
You form a link with an ally, allowing you to take harm in
their stead. All the effects of the hit or failed save are applied
to you instead of the ally. For example, if the target critically
fails a saving throw against a fireball, you would take double
damage. These effects ignore any resistances, immunities, or
other abilities you have that might mitigate them in any way,
although those of the target apply before you take the effect.
HERO’S DEFIANCE FOCUS 10
UNCOMMON CHAMPION HEALING NECROMANCY POSITIVE
Cast [free-action] verbal
Trigger An attack would bring you to 0 Hit Points.
You shout in defiance, filling you with a sudden burst of healing.
Just before applying the attack’s damage, you recover 10d4+20
Hit Points. If this is enough to prevent the attack from bringing
you to 0 Hit Points, you don’t become unconscious or dying.
Either way, cheating death is difficult, and you can’t use hero’s
defiance again until you Refocus or the next time you prepare.
Hero’s defiance cannot be used against effects with the death
trait or that would leave no remains, such as disintegrate.
LAY ON HANDS FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CHAMPION HEALING NECROMANCY POSITIVE
Cast [one-action] somatic
Range touch; Targets 1 willing living creature or 1 undead creature
Your hands become infused with positive energy, healing a
living creature or damaging an undead creature with a touch.
If you use lay on hands on a willing living target, you restore
6 Hit Points; if the target is one of your allies, they also gain a
387
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
+2 status bonus to AC for 1 round. Against an undead target,
you deal 1d6 damage and it must attempt a basic Fortitude
save; if it fails, it also takes a –2 status penalty to AC for 1 round.
Heightened (+1) The amount of healing increases by 6, and the
damage to an undead target increases by 1d6.
LITANY AGAINST SLOTH FOCUS 5
UNCOMMON CHAMPION EVOCATION GOOD LITANY
Cast [one-action] verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 evil creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration 1 round
Your litany rails against the sin of sloth, interfering with the
target’s ability to react. The target must attempt a Will save.
A particularly slothful creature, such as a sloth demon, uses
the outcome one degree of success worse than the result of
its saving throw. The target becomes temporarily immune to
all of your litanies for 1 minute.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target can’t use reactions.
Failure The target can’t use reactions and is slowed 1.
Critical Failure The target can’t use reactions and is slowed 2.
LITANY AGAINST WRATH FOCUS 3
UNCOMMON CHAMPION EVOCATION GOOD LITANY
Cast [one-action] verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 evil creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration 1 round
Your litany rails against the sin of wrath, punishing the target
for attacking good creatures. The target must attempt a Will
save. A particularly wrathful creature, such as a wrath demon,
uses the outcome one degree of success worse than the result
of its saving throw. The target then becomes temporarily
immune to all of your litanies for 1 minute.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The first time the target uses an action that deals
damage to at least one good creature, the target takes
3d6 good damage.
Failure Each time the target uses an action that deals damage to
at least one good creature, the target takes 3d6 good damage.
Critical Failure The target is enfeebled 2. Each time it uses an
action that deals damage to at least one good creature, the
target takes 3d6 good damage.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d6.
LITANY OF RIGHTEOUSNESS FOCUS 7
UNCOMMON CHAMPION EVOCATION GOOD LITANY
Cast [one-action] verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 evil creature
Duration 1 round
Your litany denounces an evildoer, rendering it susceptible
to the powers of good. The target gains weakness 7 to good.
The target then becomes temporarily immune to all of your
litanies for 1 minute.
Heightened (+1) The weakness increases by 1.
Core Rulebook
388
CLERIC
Clerics can gain the following domain spells by selecting
the Domain Initiate or Advanced Domain feat.
AGILE FEET FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CLERIC TRANSMUTATION
Domain travel
Cast [one-action] somatic
Duration until the end of the current turn
The blessings of your god make your feet faster and your
movements more fluid. You gain a +5-foot status bonus to
your Speed and ignore difficult terrain. As part of casting
agile feet, you can Stride or Step; you can instead Burrow,
Climb, Fly, or Swim if you have the appropriate Speed.
APPEARANCE OF WEALTH FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CLERIC ILLUSION
Domain wealth
Cast [two-actions] material, verbal
Range 30 feet; Area 5-foot burst
Saving Throw Will; Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You create a brief vision of immense wealth filling the
spell’s area. Each creature within 20 feet of the area that
could be enticed by material wealth must attempt a Will
saving throw. A creature that enters the area automatically
disbelieves the illusion, and disbelieving the illusion ends
any fascinated condition imposed by the spell. As long as
you Sustain the Spell, other creatures react to the treasure
like they would any other illusion, but they are not at risk of
becoming fascinated.
Critical Success The creature disbelieves the illusion and is
unaffected by it.
Success The creature is fascinated by the wealth until it has
completed its first action on its next turn.
Failure The creature is fascinated by the illusion.
ARTISTIC FLOURISH FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC TRANSMUTATION
Domain creation
Cast [two-actions] material, somatic
Range 15 feet; Targets 1 item or work of art that fits entirely
within the range
Duration 10 minutes
You transform the target to make it match your artisanal
and artistic vision. If you have expert proficiency in
Crafting, the item grants a +1 item bonus to attack rolls
if it’s a weapon or skill checks if it’s a skill tool. The target
is a beautiful and impressive piece for its new quality, but
the effect is obviously temporary, so its monetary value
doesn’t change.
When you cast this spell, any previous artistic flourish you
had cast ends.
Heightened (7th) If you have master proficiency in Crafting,
the item grants a +2 item bonus instead.
Heightened (10th) If you have legendary proficiency in
Crafting, the item grants a +3 item bonus instead.
ATHLETIC RUSH FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CLERIC TRANSMUTATION
Domain might
Cast [one-action] somatic
Duration 1 round
Your body fills with physical power and skill. You gain a +10-
foot status bonus to Speed and a +2 status bonus to Athletics
checks. As a part of Casting this Spell, you can use a Stride,
Leap, Climb, or Swim action. The spell’s bonuses apply during
that action.
BIT OF LUCK FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CLERIC DIVINATION FORTUNE
Domain luck
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 willing creature
Duration 1 minute
You tilt the scales of luck slightly to protect a creature from
disaster. When the target would attempt a saving throw, it
can roll twice and use the better result. Once it does this, the
spell ends.
If you cast bit of luck again, any previous bit of luck you
cast that’s still in effect ends. After a creature has been
targeted with bit of luck, it becomes temporarily immune for
24 hours.
BLIND AMBITION FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CLERIC EMOTION ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Domain ambition
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 60 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration 10 minutes
You strengthen a target’s ambition, increase its resentment of
allies, and make its allegiances more susceptible to change.
The target must attempt a Will save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target takes a –1 status penalty to its saving
throws and other defenses against attempts to Coerce it,
Request something of it, or use mental effects to convince
it to do something (such as a suggestion spell). This penalty
applies only if the target is being encouraged to advance its
own ambitions.
Failure As success, but the penalty is –2.
Critical Failure The target is overcome with ambition, taking
whatever actions would advance its own agenda over those
of anyone else, even without attempts to convince it.
CAPTIVATING ADORATION FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC EMOTION ENCHANTMENT MENTAL VISUAL
Domain passion
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 15-foot emanation
Saving Throw Will; Duration 1 minute
You become intensely entrancing, and creatures are distracted
by you as long as they remain within the area. You can exclude
any creatures you choose from the effects.
389
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
When a creature enters the area for the first time, it must
attempt a Will saving throw. If a creature leaves and reenters,
it uses the results of its original save.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected and temporarily
immune for 1 hour.
Success The creature is fascinated with you for its next action,
then is temporarily immune for 1 hour.
Failure The creature is fascinated with you.
Critical Failure The creature is fascinated with you, and its
attitude toward you improves by one step.
Heightened (+1) Increase the size of the emanation by 15 feet.
CHARMING TOUCH FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CLERIC EMOTION ENCHANTMENT INCAPACITATION MENTAL
Domain passion
Cast [one-action] somatic
Range touch; Targets 1 humanoid creature that could find you
attractive
Saving Throw Will; Duration 10 minutes
You infuse your target with attraction, causing it to act
friendlier toward you. The target attempts a Will save. It gains
a +4 circumstance bonus to this save if you or your allies
recently threatened or were hostile to it.
Critical Success The target is unaffected and aware you tried
to charm it.
Success The target is unaffected but thinks your spell was
something harmless instead of charming touch, unless it
identifies the spell (usually with Identify Magic).
Failure The target’s attitude becomes friendly toward you. If it
was friendly, it becomes helpful. It can’t use hostile actions
against you.
Critical Failure The target is helpful and can’t use hostile
actions against you.
You can Dismiss the spell. If you use hostile actions against the
target, the spell ends. After the spell ends, the target doesn’t
necessarily realize it was charmed unless its friendship with
you or the actions you convinced it to take clash with its
expectations, which could potentially allow you to convince
the target to continue being your friend via mundane means.
Heightened (4th) You can target any type of creature, not just
humanoids, as long as it could find you attractive.
CLOAK OF SHADOW FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CLERIC DARKNESS EVOCATION SHADOW
Domain darkness
Cast [one-action] somatic
Range touch; Targets 1 willing creature
Duration 1 minute
You drape the target in a mantle of swirling shadows that
make it harder to see. The cloak reduces bright light within
a 20-foot emanation to dim light. This is a form of magical
darkness and can therefore overcome non-magical light or
attempt to counteract magical light as described on page 458.
The target can use concealed condition gained from the
shadows to Hide, though observant creatures can still follow
the moving aura of shadow, making it difficult for the target
to become completely undetected. The target can use an
Interact action to remove the cloak and leave it behind as a
decoy, where it remains, reducing light for the rest of the spell’s
duration. If anyone picks up the cloak after it’s been removed
by the original target, the cloak evaporates and the spell ends.
COMMANDING LASH FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC ENCHANTMENT INCAPACITATION MENTAL
Domain tyranny
Cast [one-action] verbal
Requirements Your most recent action dealt damage to a
target.
Range 100 feet; Targets A creature you dealt damage to on
your most recent action.
Saving Throw Will; Duration until the end of the target’s next turn
With the threat of more pain, you compel a creature you’ve
recently harmed. You issue a command to the target, with the
effects of the spell command.
COMPETITIVE EDGE FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC EMOTION ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Domain ambition
Cast [one-action] verbal
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
Your competitiveness drives you to prove yourself against
the opposition. You gain a +1 status bonus to attack rolls and
skill checks. If an enemy within 20 feet critically succeeds at
an attack roll or skill check, your status bonus increases to
+3 attack rolls or that specific skill check (whichever the foe
critically succeeded at) for 1 round.
Heightened (7th) Increase the base bonus to +2 and the
increased bonus after an enemy critically succeeds to +4.
CRY OF DESTRUCTION FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CLERIC EVOCATION SONIC
Domain destruction
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 15-foot cone
Saving Throw basic Fortitude
Your voice booms, smashing what’s in front of you. Each creature
and unattended object in the area takes 1d8 sonic damage. If
you already dealt damage to an enemy this turn with a Strike or
spell, increase the damage dice from this spell to d12s.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d8.
DARKENED EYES FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC DARKNESS TRANSMUTATION
Domain darkness
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 60 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Fortitude; Duration varies
You infuse a creature’s vision with darkness. After attempting
its save, the target becomes temporarily immune for 24 hours.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target’s darkvision or low-light vision is suppressed
for 1 round.
Core Rulebook
390
Failure As success, but the duration is 1 minute.
Critical Failure As success, but the duration is 1 minute, and
the target is also blinded for the duration. It can attempt
a new save at the end of each of its turns. If it succeeds,
it’s no longer blinded, but its darkvision or low-light vision
remains suppressed.
DAZZLING FLASH FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CLERIC EVOCATION LIGHT VISUAL
Domain sun
Cast [two-actions] material, verbal
Area 15-foot cone
Saving Throw Fortitude
You raise your religious symbol and create a blinding flash of
light. Each creature in the area must attempt a Fortitude save.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature is dazzled for 1 round.
Failure The creature is blinded for 1 round and dazzled for 1
minute. The creature can spend an Interact action rubbing
its eyes to end the blinded condition.
Critical Failure The creature is blinded for 1 round and dazzled
for 1 hour.
Heightened (3rd) The area increases to a 30-foot cone.
DEATH’S CALL FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CLERIC NECROMANCY
Domain death
Cast [reaction] verbal
Trigger A living creature within 20 feet of you dies, or an
undead creature within 20 feet of you is destroyed.
Duration 1 minute
Seeing another pass from this world to the next invigorates you.
You gain temporary Hit Points equal to the triggering creature’s
level plus your Wisdom modifier. If the triggering creature was
undead, double the number of temporary Hit Points you gain .
These last for the duration of the spell, and the spell ends if all
the temporary Hit Points are depleted earlier.
DELUSIONAL PRIDE FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC EMOTION ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Domain confidence
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration varies
You make the target overconfident, leading it to ascribe failure
to external factors. If the target fails at an attack roll or skill
check, it takes a –1 status penalty to attack rolls and skill
checks until the end of its turn (or the end of its next turn, if it
attempted the roll outside its turn). If the creature fails a second
time while taking this penalty, the penalty increases to –2. The
duration depends on the target’s Will save. After attempting its
save, the creature becomes temporarily immune for 24 hours.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The duration is 1 round.
Failure The duration is 10 minutes.
Critical Failure The duration is 24 hours.
DESTRUCTIVE AURA FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC EVOCATION
Domain destruction
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 15-foot emanation
Duration 1 minute
Swirling sands of divine devastation surround you, weakening
the defenses of all they touch. Reduce the resistances of
creatures in the area (including yourself) by 2.
Heightened (+2) Reduce the resistances by an additional 2.
DISPERSE INTO AIR FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON AIR CLERIC POLYMORPH TRANSMUTATION
Domain air
Cast [reaction] somatic
Trigger You take damage from an enemy or a hazard.
After taking the triggering damage, you transform into air. Until
the end of the current turn, you can’t be attacked or targeted, you
don’t take up space, you can’t act, and any auras or emanations
you have are suppressed. At the end of the turn, you re-form in
any space you can occupy within 15 feet of where you were when
you dispersed. Any auras or emanations you had are restored as
long as their duration didn’t run out while you were dispersed.
DOWNPOUR FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC EVOCATION WATER
Domain water
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Area 30-foot burst
Duration 1 minute
You call forth a torrential downpour, which extinguishes nonmagical flames. Creatures in the area are concealed and gain
fire resistance 10. Creatures outside the area are concealed to
those inside the area. Creatures with weakness to water that
end their turns in the area take damage equal to their weakness.
Heightened (+1) The fire resistance increases by 2.
DREAMER’S CALL FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC ENCHANTMENT INCAPACITATION MENTAL
Domain dreams
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration until the end of the target’s next turn
The target becomes distracted and suggestible, inundated by
vivid daydreams.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target’s attention wavers. It becomes flat-footed
and fascinated by its daydreams.
Failure As success, except that you appear in the dream and
give a suggestion. This can be to approach you, run away
(as if it had the fleeing condition), Release what it’s holding,
Drop Prone, or stand in place. The creature follows this
course of action as its first action after you Cast the Spell.
Critical Failure As failure, but the target follows the course
of action for as many actions as possible for the spell’s
duration, and it does nothing else.
391
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
ENDURING MIGHT FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON ABJURATION CLERIC
Domain might
Cast [reaction] somatic
Trigger An attack or effect would deal damage to you.
Your own might mingles with divine power to protect you. You
gain resistance equal to 8 plus your Strength modifier against
all damage from the triggering attack or effect.
Heightened (+1) The resistance increases by 2.
ERADICATE UNDEATH FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC NECROMANCY POSITIVE
Domain death
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 30-foot cone
Saving Throw basic Fortitude
A massive deluge of life energy causes the undead to
fall apart. Each undead creature in the area takes 4d12
positive damage.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d12.
FACE IN THE CROWD FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CLERIC ILLUSION VISUAL
Domain cities
Cast [one-action] somatic
Duration 1 minute
While in a crowd of roughly similar creatures, your appearance
becomes bland and nondescript. You gain a +2 status bonus
to Deception and Stealth checks to go unnoticed among the
crowd, and you ignore difficult terrain caused by the crowd.
Heightened (3rd) The spell gains a range of 10 feet and can
target up to 10 creatures.
FIRE RAY FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON ATTACK CLERIC EVOCATION FIRE
Domain fire
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 60 feet; Targets 1 creature or object
A blazing band of fire arcs through the air. Make a spell attack
roll. The ray deals 2d6 fire damage.
Critical Success The ray deals double damage and 1d4
persistent fire damage.
Success The ray deals full damage.
Heightened (+1) The ray’s initial damage increases by 2d6,
and the persistent fire damage on a critical success increases
by 1d4.
FLAME BARRIER FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON ABJURATION CLERIC
Domain fire
Cast [reaction] verbal
Trigger An effect would deal fire damage to either you or an
ally within range.
Range 60 feet; Targets the creature that would take fire damage
Core Rulebook
392
You swiftly deflect incoming flames. The target gains fire
resistance 15 against the triggering effect.
Heightened (+2) The resistance increases by 5.
FORCED QUIET FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON ABJURATION CLERIC
Domain secrecy
Cast [two-actions] material, somatic
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Fortitude; Duration varies
You quiet the target’s voice, preventing it from giving away
valuable secrets. This doesn’t prevent the target from talking
or providing verbal spell components, but no creature more
than 10 feet away can hear its whispers without succeeding
at a Perception check against your spell DC, which might
interfere with auditory or linguistic effects as well as
communication. The spell’s duration depends on the target’s
Fortitude save. After attempting its save, the target becomes
temporarily immune for 24 hours.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The duration is 1 round.
Failure The duration is 1 minute.
Critical Failure The duration is 10 minutes.
GLIMPSE THE TRUTH FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC DIVINATION REVELATION
Domain truth
Cast [one-action] somatic
Area 30-foot emanation
Duration 1 round
Divine insight lets you see things as they truly are. The GM
attempts a secret counteract check against each illusion that is
at least partially within the area. Instead of counteracting the
illusion, you see through it (for instance, if the check succeeds
against an illusory disguise spell, you see the creature’s true
form but illusory disguise doesn’t end).
The area moves with you for the duration of the spell, and
the GM attempts a secret counteract check each time a new
illusion is within the area.
Heightened (7th) You can allow everyone to see through
illusions you succeed against, not just yourself.
HEALER’S BLESSING FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CLERIC NECROMANCY
Domain healing
Cast [one-action] verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 willing living creature
Duration 1 minute
Your words bless a creature with an enhanced connection to
positive energy. When the target regains Hit Points from a
healing spell, it regains 1 additional Hit Point.
The target regains additional Hit Points from healer’s
blessing only the first time it regains HP from a given healing
spell, so a spell that heals the creature repeatedly over a
duration would restore additional Hit Points only once.
Heightened (+1) The additional healing increases by 2 HP.
HURTLING STONE FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON ATTACK CLERIC EARTH EVOCATION
Domain earth
Cast [one-action] somatic
Range 60 feet; Targets 1 creature
You evoke a magical stone and throw it, with your god’s
presence guiding your aim. Make a spell attack roll against
the target. The stone deals bludgeoning damage equal to 1d6
plus your Strength modifier.
Critical Success The stone deals double damage.
Success The stone deals full damage.
Heightened (+1) The stone’s damage increases by 1d6.
KNOW THE ENEMY FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC DIVINATION FORTUNE
Domain knowledge
Cast [reaction] somatic
Trigger You roll initiative and can see a creature, you succeed
at an attack roll against a creature, or a creature fails a
saving throw against one of your spells.
Use a Recall Knowledge action, rolling the appropriate skill
check to identify the triggering creature’s abilities. You can
roll your check twice and use the better result.
LOCALIZED QUAKE FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC EARTH TRANSMUTATION
Domain earth
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 15-foot emanation or 15-foot cone
Saving Throw Reflex
You shake the earth, toppling nearby creatures. Choose
whether the spell’s area is a 15-foot emanation or a 15-foot
cone when you cast it. Each creature in the area standing on
solid ground may take 4d6 bludgeoning damage and must
attempt a Reflex saving throw.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature takes half damage.
Failure The creature takes full damage and falls prone.
Critical Failure The creature takes double damage and
falls prone.
Heightened (+1) Increase the damage by 2d6.
LUCKY BREAK FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC DIVINATION FORTUNE
Domain luck
Cast [reaction] verbal
Trigger You fail (but don’t critically fail) a saving throw.
Reroll the saving throw and use the better result. You then
become temporarily immune for 10 minutes.
MAGIC’S VESSEL FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CLERIC ENCHANTMENT
Domain magic
Cast [one-action] somatic
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
393
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
A creature becomes a receptacle for pure magical energy sent
by your deity. The target gains a +1 status bonus to saving
throws. Each time you Cast a Spell from your spell slots, you
automatically Sustain this Spell and grant its target resistance
to damage from spells until the start of your next turn. This
resistance is equal to the level of the spell you cast.
MALIGNANT SUSTENANCE FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC NECROMANCY NEGATIVE
Domain undeath
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 willing undead creature
Duration 1 minute
You embed a seed of negative energy in an undead creature,
restoring its unnatural vigor. The target gains fast healing 7.
This healing comes from negative energy, so it heals the
undead rather than damaging it.
Heightened (+1) The fast healing increases by 2.
MOONBEAM FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON ATTACK CLERIC EVOCATION FIRE LIGHT
Domain moon
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Targets 1 creature or object
You shine a ray of moonlight. Make a spell attack roll. The beam
of light deals 1d6 fire damage. Moonbeam deals silver damage
for the purposes of weaknesses, resistances, and the like.
Critical Success The beam deals double damage, and the
target is dazzled for 1 minute.
Success The beam deals full damage, and the target is dazzled
for 1 round.
Heightened (+1) The ray’s damage increases by 1d6.
MYSTIC BEACON FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC EVOCATION
Domain magic
Cast [one-action] somatic
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 willing creature
Duration until the start of your next turn
The next damaging or healing spell the target casts before the
start of your next turn deals damage or restores Hit Points
as if the spell were heightened 1 level higher than its actual
level. The spell otherwise functions at its actual level. Once the
target casts the spell, mystic beacon ends.
NATURE’S BOUNTY FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC CONJURATION PLANT POSITIVE
Domain nature
Cast [one-action] somatic
Requirements You have a free hand.
A palm-sized raw fruit or vegetable appears in your open hand.
You choose the specific type of food. A creature can consume
the food with an Interact action to regain 3d10+12 Hit Points
and be nourished as if it had eaten a meal. If uneaten, the food
rots and crumbles to dust after 1 minute.
Heightened (+1) The Hit Points restored increase by 6.
OVERSTUFF FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CLERIC TRANSMUTATION
Domain indulgence
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 living creature
Saving Throw Fortitude
Huge amounts of food and drink fill the target. It receives a full
meal’s worth of nourishment and must attempt a Fortitude save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target is sickened 1, but if it spends an action to
end the condition, it succeeds automatically.
Failure The target is sickened 1.
Critical Failure The target is sickened 2.
A target sickened by this spell takes a –10-foot status penalty
to its Speed until it’s no longer sickened.
PERFECTED FORM FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON ABJURATION CLERIC FORTUNE
Domain perfection
Cast [reaction] somatic
Trigger You fail a saving throw against a morph, petrification,
or polymorph effect.
Reroll the saving throw and use the better result.
PERFECTED MIND FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON ABJURATION CLERIC
Domain perfection
Cast [one-action] verbal
You meditate upon perfection to remove all distractions
from your mind. Attempt a new Will save against one mental
effect currently affecting you that required a Will save. Use
the result of this new save to determine the outcome of the
mental effect, unless the new save would have a worse result
than the original save, in which case nothing happens. You can
use perfected mind against a given effect only once.
POSITIVE LUMINANCE FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC LIGHT NECROMANCY POSITIVE
Domain sun
Cast [one-action] somatic
Duration 1 minute
Drawing life force into yourself, you become a beacon of
positive energy. You glow with bright light in a 10-foot
emanation, and you gain an internal pool of light called a
luminance reservoir, which begins with a value of 4. At the
start of each of your turns, you can use a free action to
increase the luminance reservoir by 4. If you do, the radius of
your light increases by 10 feet.
If an undead creature damages you with an attack or spell
while it’s within the area of your light, that creature takes
positive damage equal to half your luminance reservoir value.
It takes this damage only the first time it damages you in
a round.
You can Dismiss this Spell. When you do, you can target
a creature within your light and direct the positive energy
into it. The target must be a willing living creature or an
Core Rulebook
394
undead creature. This heals a living target or damages
an undead target by an amount equal to your luminance
reservoir’s value.
When you cast positive luminance, any other positive
luminance spell you already had in effect ends.
Heightened (+1) Both the initial value of your luminance
reservoir and the amount you gain each turn increase by 1.
PRECIOUS METALS FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC TRANSMUTATION
Domain wealth
Cast [one-action] material
Range touch; Targets 1 metal weapon, up to 10 pieces of metal
or metal-tipped ammunition, 1 suit of metal armor, or up to
1 bulk of metal material (such as coins)
Duration 1 minute
Your deity blesses base metals to transform them into precious
materials. The target item transforms from its normal metal into
cold iron, copper, gold, iron, silver, or steel (the details for these
metals are found on pages 577–579). An item transmuted in this
way deals damage according to its new material. For example,
a steel sword transmuted to cold iron would deal additional
damage to a creature with a weakness to cold iron.
This change is clearly magical and temporary, so the item’s
monetary value doesn’t change; you couldn’t transmute copper
coins to gold and use those coins to purchase something or as
a cost for a spell.
Heightened (8th) Add adamantine (page 578) and mithral
(page 579) to the list of metals you can transform the item into.
PROTECTOR’S SACRIFICE FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON ABJURATION CLERIC
Domain protection
Cast [reaction] somatic
Trigger An ally within 30 feet takes damage.
Range 30 feet
You protect your ally by suffering in their stead. Reduce the
damage the triggering ally would take by 3. You redirect
this damage to yourself, but your immunities, weaknesses,
resistances and so on do not apply.
You aren’t subject to any conditions or other effects of
whatever damaged your ally (such as poison from a venomous
bite). Your ally is still subject to those effects even if you
redirect all of the triggering damage to yourself.
Heightened (+1) The damage you redirect increases by 3.
PROTECTOR’S SPHERE FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON ABJURATION CLERIC
Domain protection
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 15-foot emanation
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
A protective aura emanates out from you, safeguarding you
and your allies. You gain resistance 3 to all damage. Your allies
also gain this resistance while they are within the area.
Heightened (+1) The resistance increases by 1.
PULSE OF THE CITY FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC DIVINATION SCRYING
Domain cities
Cast [three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 25 miles
You tap into the zeitgeist of the nearest settlement in range (if
any). You learn the name of the settlement, and you can utter a
special word to learn a brief summary of one significant event
happening in the settlement. Choose one of the following
words, which indicates the type of people involved and type
of event you learn about.
• Wardens city guards, barristers, and judges (criminal
reports, busts, changes in routines, legal trials)
• Titles nobles and politicians (high society weddings,
elite soirees, political rallies)
• Masses common folk and merchants (gathering mobs,
major sales)
When uttering your word, you can exclude events you already
know about, whether you know about them from this spell
or from other experiences. If you cast pulse of the city again
within 24 hours, you can say “echo” instead of another word
to get an update on the event you learned about the last time
you Cast the Spell.
Pulse of the city reveals only publicly available or
observable information. You never learn clandestine
movements or other details people are specifically trying to
hide. The spell is also notoriously bad at overcoming magic
meant to avoid detection; it automatically fails to reveal
information about events involving creatures, places, or
objects affected by spells that could prevent or counteract
pulse of the city (such as nondetection).
Heightened (5th) The range increases to 100 miles.
PUSHING GUST FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON AIR CLERIC CONJURATION
Domain air
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 500 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Fortitude
Giving the air a push, you buffet the target with a powerful
gust of wind; it must attempt a Fortitude save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target is pushed 5 feet away from you.
Failure The target is pushed 10 feet away from you.
Critical Failure The target is pushed 10 feet away from you
and knocked prone.
READ FATE FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CLERIC DIVINATION PREDICTION
Domain fate
Cast 1 minute (material, somatic, verbal)
Range 10 feet; Targets 1 creature other than you
You attempt to learn more about the target’s fate in the short
term, usually within the next day for most prosaic creatures,
or the next hour or less for someone likely to have multiple
rapid experiences, such as someone actively adventuring.
395
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
You learn a single enigmatic word connected to the creature’s
fate in that time frame. Fate is notoriously inscrutable, and the
word isn’t necessarily meant to be taken at face value, so the
meaning is often clear only in hindsight. The GM rolls a secret
DC 6 flat check. If the creature’s fate is too uncertain, or on a
failed flat check, the spell yields the word “inconclusive.” Either
way, the creature is then temporarily immune for 24 hours.
REBUKE DEATH FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC HEALING NECROMANCY POSITIVE
Domain healing
Cast [one-action] to [three-actions] (somatic)
Area 20-foot emanation; Targets 1 living creature per action
spent to cast this spell
You snatch creatures from the jaws of death. You can spend 1
to 3 actions Casting this Spell, and you can target a number of
creatures equal to the actions spent. Each target regains 3d6 Hit
Points. If the target had the dying condition, coming back from
dying due to this healing doesn’t increase its wounded condition.
Heightened (+1) Increase the healing by 1d6.
RETRIBUTIVE PAIN FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON ABJURATION CLERIC MENTAL NONLETHAL
Domain pain
Cast [reaction] somatic
Trigger A creature in range damages you.
Range 30 feet; Targets the triggering creature
Saving Throw basic Fortitude
You vengefully reflect your pain upon your tormentor. The
target takes mental damage equal to half the amount it dealt
to you when it triggered the spell.
SAFEGUARD SECRET FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON ABJURATION CLERIC MENTAL
Domain secrecy
Cast 1 minute (somatic, verbal)
Range 10 feet; Targets you and any number of willing allies
Duration 1 hour
You ensure a secret remains safe from prying spies. Choose one
piece of information that at least some of the targets know;
you can target a creature only if it remains within range for the
full minute during which you Cast the Spell. The spell grants
those who know the piece of knowledge you have chosen a
+4 status bonus to skill checks (typically Deception checks)
to conceal this knowledge and to saving throws against spells
that specifically attempt to obtain this knowledge from them
and effects that would force them to reveal it.
If you Cast this Spell again, any previous safeguard secret
you had cast ends.
SAVOR THE STING FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON ATTACK CLERIC ENCHANTMENT MENTAL NONLETHAL
Domain pain
Cast [one-action] somatic
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will
You inflict pain upon the target and revel in their anguish. This
deals 1d4 mental damage and 1d4 persistent mental damage;
the target must attempt a Will save. As long as the target is
taking persistent damage from this spell, you gain a +1 status
bonus to attack rolls and skill checks against the target.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target takes half damage and no persistent damage.
Failure The target takes full initial and persistent damage.
Critical Failure The target takes double initial and
persistent damage.
Heightened (+1) The initial damage increases by 1d4 and the
persistent damage increases by 1d4.
SCHOLARLY RECOLLECTION FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CLERIC DIVINATION FORTUNE
Domain knowledge
Cast [reaction] verbal
Trigger You attempt a Perception check to Seek, or you
attempt a skill check to Recall Knowledge with a skill you’re
trained in.
Speaking a short prayer as you gather your thoughts, you’re
blessed to find that your deity gave you just the right bit of
information for your situation. Roll the triggering check twice
and use the better result.
SHARED NIGHTMARE FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC EMOTION ENCHANTMENT INCAPACITATION MENTAL
Domain nightmares
Cast[two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration varies
Merging minds with the target, you swap disorienting visions
from one another’s nightmares. One of you will become
confused, but which it’ll be depends on the target’s Will save.
Critical Success You are confused for 1 round.
Success At the start of your next turn, you spend your first
action with the confused condition, then act normally.
Failure As success, but the target is affected instead of you,
spending its first action each turn confused. The duration
is 1 minute.
Critical Failure The target is confused for 1 minute.
SOOTHING WORDS FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CLERIC EMOTION ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Domain family
Cast [one-action] verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 ally
Duration 1 round
You attempt to calm the target by uttering soothing words
in a calm and even tone. The target gains a +1 status bonus
to Will saving throws. This bonus increases to +2 against
emotion effects.
In addition, when you Cast this Spell, you can attempt to
counteract one emotion effect on the target.
Heightened (5th) The bonus to saves increases to +2, or +3
against emotion effects.
Core Rulebook
396
SPLASH OF ART FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CLERIC ILLUSION VISUAL
Domain creation
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Area 5-foot burst
Saving Throw Will; Duration varies
A deluge of colorful illusory paint, tools, or other symbols
of art and artisanship drift down in the area. Roll 1d4 to
determine the color of the illusion. Each creature in the
area must attempt a Will save. A creature is unaffected on a
success. On a failure or critical failure, the creature takes the
results listed on the table relevant to the color.
1d4 Color Failure Critical Failure
1 White Dazzled 1 round Dazzled 1 minute
2 Red Enfeebled 1 for 1 round Enfeebled 2 for 1 round
3 Yellow Frightened 1 Frightened 2
4 Blue Sluggish 1 for 1 round Sluggish 2 for 1 round
SUDDEN SHIFT FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON ABJURATION CLERIC ILLUSION
Domain trickery
Cast [reaction] somatic
Trigger An enemy misses you with a melee attack.
Duration until the end of your next turn
You swiftly move from a dangerous spot and veil yourself. You
Step and become concealed.
SWEET DREAM FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON AUDITORY CLERIC ENCHANTMENT LINGUISTIC MENTAL SLEEP
Domain dreams
Cast [three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 willing creature
Duration 10 minutes
With soothing song or tales, you lull the target into an
enchanting dream. When you cast the spell, the target
falls unconscious if it wasn’t already. While unconscious, it
experiences a dream of your choice. If it sleeps for at least 1
minute, it gains the benefit of the dream for the remainder of
the spell’s duration.
• Dream of Insight +1 status bonus to Intelligence-based
skill checks
• Dream of Glamour +1 status bonus to Charisma-based
skill checks
• Dream of Voyaging +5-foot status bonus to Speed
If you Cast this Spell again, the effects of any previous sweet
dream you cast end.
TAKE ITS COURSE FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC NECROMANCY
Domain indulgence
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
When someone has overindulged, you can hasten them
past the worst of their affliction or intensify their misery.
This spell attempts to progress a disease affliction, a poison
affliction, or persistent poison damage affecting the target.
If the target is affected by more than one of these, you can
choose from among those you are aware of; otherwise the
GM chooses randomly. An unwilling target can attempt a
Will save to negate take its course.
The effect of this spell depends on whether you’re attempting
to end an affliction or persistent poison damage, and whether
you are attempting to help or hinder the target’s recovery.
• Affliction The target immediately attempts its next
saving throw against the affliction. You can grant
the creature your choice of a +2 status bonus or
a –2 status penalty to its saving throw against
the affliction.
• Persistent Poison You can cause the target take the
persistent poison damage immediately when you Cast
this Spell (in addition to taking it at the end of its next
turn). Whether or not you do so, the target attempts
an additional flat check against the persistent poison
damage. You can set the DC of that flat check to 5 or
20 instead of the normal DC.
Heightened (7th) You can attempt to progress any number of
the target’s eligible afflictions and persistent poison damage.
TEMPT FATE FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC DIVINATION FORTUNE
Domain fate
Cast [reaction] somatic
Trigger You or an ally within range attempts a saving throw.
Range 120 feet; Targets the triggering creature
You twist the forces of fate to make a moment dire or
uneventful, with no in-between. The target gains a +1 status
bonus to the triggering saving throw. If the saving throw’s
result is a success, it becomes a critical success. If it’s a
failure, it becomes a critical failure, and the critical failure
can’t be reduced by abilities that usually reduce critical
failure, such as improved evasion.
If the triggering ability did not have both a critical success
and critical failure condition, tempt fate fails, but you don’t
expend the Focus Point for Casting this Spell.
Heightened (8th) The bonus on the saving throw is +2.
TIDAL SURGE FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CLERIC EVOCATION WATER
Domain water
Cast [one-action] somatic
Range 60 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Fortitude
You call forth a tremendous wave to move the target either in
a body of water or on the ground. The target must attempt a
Fortitude save.
Failure You move the target 5 feet in any direction along
the ground or 10 feet in any direction through a body
of water.
Critical Failure You move the target up to 10 feet in any
direction along the ground or 20 feet in any direction
through a body of water.
397
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
walls with ease. When you cast this spell, you gain either a climb
Speed or a swim Speed. The Speed is equal to your land Speed.
Heightened (5th) You can choose to gain a fly Speed.
TRICKSTER’S TWIN FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC ILLUSION VISUAL
Domain trickery
Cast [two-actions] material, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration 1 minute
You rarely settle for being in just one place. Choose a location
within 100 feet of the target that the target can see. You
create an illusion of yourself there that only it can see and that
mimics all your actions. The target must attempt a Will save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target believes you’re in the designated location and
can’t see you in your actual location. The target automatically
disbelieves the illusion when you use an action that doesn’t
make sense in the illusion’s position, or if the target attacks,
touches, Seeks, or otherwise engages with the illusion. If you
use a hostile action against the target, the spell ends.
Failure As success, but the target must succeed at a Will save to
disbelieve the illusion when one of the listed events occurs.
Critical Failure As success, but the target must critically
succeed at a Will save to disbelieve when one of the listed
events occurs.
UNIMPEDED STRIDE FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CLERIC TRANSMUTATION
Domain freedom
Cast [one-action] somatic
Nothing can hold you in place. You immediately escape from
every magical effect that has you immobilized or grabbed unless
the effect is of a higher level than your unimpeded stride spell.
You then Stride. During this movement, you ignore difficult
terrain and any circumstance or status penalties to your Speed.
UNITY FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON ABJURATION CLERIC FORTUNE
Domain family
Cast [reaction] verbal
Trigger You and 1 or more allies within range are targeted by a
spell or ability that allows a saving throw.
Range 30 feet; Targets each ally targeted by the triggering spell
You put up a united defense. Each ally can use your saving
throw modifier instead of its own against the triggering spell.
Each ally decides individually which modifier to use.
VEIL OF CONFIDENCE FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CLERIC ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Domain confidence
Cast [one-action] verbal
Duration 1 minute
You surround yourself in a veil of confidence. You reduce your
current frightened condition by 1, and whenever you would
become frightened during the duration, reduce the amount by 1.
TOUCH OF OBEDIENCE FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CLERIC ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Domain tyranny
Cast [one-action] somatic
Range touch; Targets 1 living creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration varies
Your imperious touch erodes the target’s willpower, making it
easier to control. The target attempts a Will save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target is stupefied 1 until the end of your current turn.
Failure The target is stupefied 1 until the end of your next turn.
Critical Failure The target is stupefied 1 for 1 minute.
TOUCH OF THE MOON FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC ENCHANTMENT LIGHT
Domain moon
Cast [one-action] somatic
Range touch; Target 1 creature
Duration 1 minute
When you touch the target, a symbol of the moon appears on
its forehead, glowing with soft moonlight. The target glows
with dim light in a 20-foot radius. It also gets a benefit based
on a phase of the moon, starting with the new moon and
changing to the next phase at the end of each of its turns.
• New Moon The target receives no benefit.
• Waxing Moon The target gains a +1 status bonus to
attack rolls and a +4 status bonus to damage rolls.
• Full Moon The target gains a +1 status bonus to attack
rolls, AC, and saving throws and a +4 status bonus to
damage rolls.
• Waning Moon The target gains a +1 status bonus to
AC and saving throws. After this phase, return to the
new moon.
TOUCH OF UNDEATH FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON ATTACK CLERIC NECROMANCY NEGATIVE
Domain undeath
Cast [one-action] somatic
Range touch; Targets 1 living creature
Saving Throw Fortitude
You attack the target’s life force with undeath, dealing 1d6
negative damage. The target must attempt a Fortitude save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target takes half damage.
Failure The target takes full damage, and positive effects heal
it only half as much as normal for 1 round.
Critical Failure The target takes double damage, and positive
effects heal it only half as much as normal for 1 minute.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d6.
TRAVELER’S TRANSIT FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC EVOCATION
Domain travel
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
You add power to your muscles, allowing you to swim or climb
Core Rulebook
398
If you critically fail a save against fear, veil of confidence
ends immediately, and you increase any frightened condition
you gain from the critical failure by 1 instead of decreasing it.
VIBRANT THORNS FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CLERIC MORPH PLANT TRANSMUTATION
Domain nature
Cast [one-action] somatic
Duration 1 minute
Your body sprouts a coat of brambly thorns that harm those
that strike you and thrive on life magic. Adjacent creatures
that hit you with a melee attack, as well as creatures that hit
you with unarmed attacks, take 1 piercing damage each time
they do. Anytime you cast a positive spell, the damage from
your thorns increases to 1d6 until the start of your next turn.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1, or 1d6 after you
cast a positive spell.
WAKING NIGHTMARE FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CLERIC EMOTION ENCHANTMENT FEAR MENTAL
Domain nightmares
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration varies
You fill the creature’s mind with a terrifying vision out of its
nightmares. The target must attempt a Will save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target is frightened 1.
Failure The target is frightened 2.
Critical Failure The target is frightened 3.
If the target is unconscious when you Cast this Spell on it, it
immediately wakes up before attempting its save, and if it fails
its save, it gains the fleeing condition for 1 round in addition to
the effects noted above.
WEAPON SURGE FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CLERIC EVOCATION
Domain zeal
Cast [one-action] somatic
Range touch; Targets 1 weapon you’re wielding
Holding your weapon aloft, you fill it with divine energy. On
your next Strike with that weapon before the start of your
next turn, you gain a +1 status bonus to the attack roll and the
weapon deals an additional die of damage. If the weapon has
a striking rune, this instead increases the number of dice from
the striking rune by 1 (to a maximum of 3 extra weapon dice).
If the target weapon leaves your possession, weapon
surge immediately ends.
WORD OF FREEDOM FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Domain freedom
Cast [one-action] verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Duration 1 round
You utter a liberating word of power that frees a creature.
You suppress one of the following conditions of your choice:
confused, frightened, grabbed, or paralyzed. The target isn’t
affected by the chosen condition, and if you suppress the
grabbed condition, the target automatically breaks free from
any grab affecting it when you Cast the Spell.
If you don’t remove the effect that provided the condition,
the condition returns after the spell ends. For example, if a
spell was making the target confused for 1 minute, word of
freedom would let the target act normally for a round, but the
confused condition would return afterward.
WORD OF TRUTH FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CLERIC DIVINATION
Domain truth
Cast [one-action] verbal
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You speak a statement you believe to be true and that is free of
any attempt to deceive through twisting words, omission, and
so on. The statement must be 25 words or fewer. A symbol of
your deity glows above your head, and anyone who sees you
and hears your statement knows that you believe it to be true.
Each time you Sustain this Spell, you can repeat this effect.
ZEAL FOR BATTLE FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CLERIC EMOTION ENCHANTMENT FORTUNE MENTAL
Domain zeal
Cast [reaction] verbal
Trigger You and at least 1 ally are about to roll initiative.
Range 10 feet; Targets you and the triggering ally
You stoke the righteous anger within yourself and an ally. You
and the target ally each roll a d20 and use the higher result for
both your initiative rolls. You each still use your own Perception
modifier or other statistic to determine your results.
DRUID
Druids can gain the following order spells.
GOODBERRY FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON DRUID HEALING NECROMANCY
Cast 1 hour (somatic, verbal)
Range touch; Targets 1 freshly picked berry
Duration 1 day
You imbue the target berry with the bounty of nature, allowing
it to heal and sustain far beyond its normal capacity. A living
creature that eats the berry with an Interact action gains as
much nourishment as from a square meal for a typical human
and regains 1d8+5 Hit Points. If it’s not consumed during the
duration, or if you cast goodberry again, the berry withers away.
Heightened (+1) You can target an additional berry.
HEAL ANIMAL FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON DRUID HEALING NECROMANCY POSITIVE
Cast [one-action] to [two-actions] somatic
Range touch or 30 feet (see text); Targets  1 willing living
animal creature
399
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
You heal an animal’s wounds, restoring 1d8 Hit Points to
the target. The number of actions spent Casting this Spell
determines its effect.
• [one-action] somatic The spell has a range of touch.
• [two-actions] somatic, verbal The spell has a range of 30 feet
and restores an additional 8 Hit Points to the target.
Heightened (+1) The amount of healing increases by 1d8, and
the additional healing for the 2-action version increases by 8.
IMPALING BRIARS FOCUS 8
UNCOMMON CONJURATION DRUID PLANT
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area ground within a 100-foot emanation
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
The ground within the area transforms into a mass of
dangerous briars that assault and impede your foes. Each
round when you Sustain the Spell, you can select one of the
following effects to occur in the area.
• Ensnare The briars clump around your foes, attempting
to hold them in place. A foe within the area (or flying
at most 20 feet above the area) must attempt a Reflex
save. On a failure, it takes a –10-foot circumstance
penalty to all Speeds for 1 round, and on a critical failure,
it is immobilized for 1 round unless it Escapes.
• Impede The briars twist and writhe, making the entire
area difficult terrain.
• Wall A wall of thorns appears in the area, lasting for
1 round. The wall is greater difficult terrain instead of
difficult terrain.
In addition, once per round you can direct the briars to impale
any target in the area (or flying up to 20 feet above the area)
that you can see by using a single action, which has the
concentrate and manipulate traits. Make a spell attack roll. On
a success, the target takes 10d6 piercing damage and takes a
–10-foot circumstance penalty to all Speeds for 1 round; on a
critical success, the target is immobilized for 1 round unless
it Escapes.
PRIMAL SUMMONS FOCUS 6
UNCOMMON CONJURATION DRUID
Cast [free-action] verbal
You enhance a summoned creature with the power of the
elements. If your next action is to cast either summon animal
or summon plant or fungus, choose air, earth, fire, or water, and
the creature you summon gains the corresponding abilities.
• Air The creature gains a fly Speed of 60 feet.
• Earth The creature gains a burrow Speed of 20 feet,
reduces its land Speed by 10 feet (minimum 5 feet), and
gains resistance 5 to physical damage.
• Fire The creature’s attacks deal 1d6 extra fire damage,
and it gains resistance 10 to fire and weakness 5 to
cold and water.
• Water The creature gains a swim Speed of 60 feet,
can spend 1 action after a melee attack to attempt a
Shove (ignoring multiple attack penalty), and gains
resistance 5 to fire.
STORM LORD FOCUS 9
UNCOMMON AIR DRUID ELECTRICITY EVOCATION
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal; Requirements You are outdoors
and aboveground.
Area 100-foot emanation
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
The sky above you darkens in a matter of moments, swirling
with ominous clouds punctuated by flashes of lighting. Each
round when you Sustain the Spell, you can select one of the
following effects to occur in the area.
• Calm No additional effect.
• Fog Heavy fog rolls in, concealing the area with the
effects of obscuring mist.
• Rain Torrential rain falls from the sky, dousing ordinary
flames. Creatures in the area take a –2 circumstance
penalty to Acrobatics and Perception checks.
• Wind Powerful winds buffet the area in all directions.
Ranged attacks take a –4 circumstance penalty, and
all flying is against the wind and counts as moving
through difficult terrain.
In addition, once per round you can use a single action, which
has the concentrate and manipulate traits, to call down a bolt
of lightning, striking any target in range that you can see. You
deal 10d6 electricity damage to the target; it must attempt a
basic Reflex save. On a failure, it is also deafened for 1 round.
STORMWIND FLIGHT FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON AIR DRUID TRANSMUTATION
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
Powerful winds carry you smoothly through the air, giving you
a fly Speed equal to your Speed. When this spell’s duration
would end, if you’re still flying, you float to the ground, as
feather fall.
Heightened (6th) When you fly using stormwind flight, you
don’t count flying against the wind as difficult terrain.
TEMPEST SURGE FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON AIR DRUID ELECTRICITY EVOCATION
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Reflex
You surround a foe in a swirling storm of violent winds,
roiling clouds, and crackling lightning. The storm deals 1d12
electricity damage. The target must attempt a basic Reflex
save. On a failure, the target also is clumsy 2 for 1 round and
takes 1 persistent electricity damage.
Heightened (+1) The initial damage increases by 1d12, and the
persistent electricity damage on a failure increases by 1.
WILD MORPH FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON DRUID MORPH TRANSMUTATION
Cast [one-action] to [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
You morph your body based on your training, choosing one of
the following effects based on your wild order feats.
Core Rulebook
400
• If you have Wild Shape, you can morph your hands
into wild claws. Your hands transform into incredibly
sharp claws. These claws are an unarmed attack you’re
trained in and deal 1d6 slashing damage each (agile,
finesse). You can still hold and use items with your
hands while they’re transformed by this spell, but you
cannot hold an item while attacking. If you have Insect
Shape, you can instead transform your mouth into wild
jaws, an unarmed attack you’re trained in that deals
1d8 piercing damage.
• If you have Elemental Shape, you can morph your body
to be partially composed of elemental matter, granting
you resistance 5 to critical hits and precision damage.
• If you have Plant Shape, you can morph your arms into
long vines, increasing your reach to 10 feet (or 15 feet
with a reach weapon).
• If you have Soaring Shape, you can cast the spell as
a two-action activity ([two-actions] somatic, verbal) to grow
wings from your back. These wings allow you to fly
with a fly Speed of 30 feet.
Heightened (6th) You can choose up to two of the effects from
the list. Wild claws leave terrible, ragged wounds that also
deal 2d6 persistent bleed damage on a hit, and wild jaws are
envenomed, also dealing 2d6 persistent poison damage on a hit.
Heightened (10th) You can choose up to three of the effects
from the list. Wild claws deal 4d6 persistent bleed damage on
a hit, and wild jaws deal 4d6 persistent poison damage on a hit.
WILD SHAPE FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON DRUID POLYMORPH TRANSMUTATION
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute (or longer)
You infuse yourself with primal essence and transform yourself
into another form. You can polymorph into any form listed in
pest form, which lasts 10 minutes. All other wild shape forms
last 1 minute. You can add more forms to your wild shape list
with druid feats; your feat might grant you some or all of the
forms from a given polymorph spell. When you transform into
a form granted by a spell, you gain all the effects of the form
you chose from a version of the spell heightened to wild shape’s
level. Wild shape allows you to use your own shapeshifting
training more easily than most polymorph spells. When you
choose to use your own attack modifier while polymorphed
instead of the form’s default attack modifier, you gain a +2
status bonus to your attack rolls.
Heightened (2nd) You can also wild shape into the forms listed
in animal form.
MONK
Monks can gain the following ki spells.
ABUNDANT STEP FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CONJURATION MONK TELEPORTATION
Cast [one-action] somatic
Range 15 feet or more
You move so fast you blur across planar boundaries. You teleport
up to a distance equal to your Speed within your line of sight.
EMPTY BODY FOCUS 9
UNCOMMON CONJURATION MONK TELEPORTATION
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
You turn ethereal, with the effects of ethereal jaunt, but you
don’t need to concentrate.
KI BLAST FOCUS 3
UNCOMMON EVOCATION FORCE MONK
Cast [one-action] to [three-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 15-foot cone or more
Saving Throw Fortitude
You unleash your ki as a powerful blast of force that deals 2d6
force damage. If you use 2 actions to cast ki blast, increase the
size of the cone to 30 feet and the damage to 3d6. If you use
3 actions to cast ki blast, increase the size of the cone to 60
feet and the damage to 4d6. Each creature in the area must
attempt a Fortitude saving throw.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature takes half damage.
Failure The creature takes full damage and is pushed 5 feet.
Critical Failure The creature takes double damage and is
pushed 10 feet.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d6, or by 2d6 if you
use 2 or 3 actions.
KI RUSH FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON MONK TRANSMUTATION
Casting [one-action] verbal
Accelerated by your ki, you move with such speed you become
a blur. Move two times: two Strides, two Steps, or one Stride
and one Step (in either order). You gain the concealed condition
during this movement and until the start of your next turn.
KI STRIKE FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON MONK TRANSMUTATION
Casting [one-action] verbal
You focus your ki into magical attacks. Make an unarmed
Strike or Flurry of Blows (this doesn’t change the limit on
using only one flourish per turn). You gain a +1 status bonus
to your attack rolls with the Strikes, and the Strikes deal 1d6
extra damage. This damage can be any of the following types
of your choice, chosen each time you Strike: force, lawful (only
if you’re lawful), negative, or positive.
Heightened (+4) The extra damage increases by 1d6.
QUIVERING PALM FOCUS 8
UNCOMMON INCAPACITATION MONK NECROMANCY
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Saving Throw Fortitude; Duration 1 month
Make a melee unarmed Strike. If you hit and the target is alive,
anytime during the duration, you can spend a single action,
which has the auditory and concentrate traits, to speak a word
401
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
of death that could instantly slay it. The target must attempt a
Fortitude save.
Critical Success The target survives, the spell ends, and the
target is then temporarily immune for 24 hours.
Success The target is stunned 1 and takes 40 damage, the spell
ends, and the target is then temporarily immune for 24 hours.
Failure The target is stunned 3 and takes 80 damage. The
spell’s duration continues, but the target is then temporarily
immune for 24 hours against being killed by quivering palm.
Critical Failure The target dies.
If you cast quivering palm again, the effects of any quivering
palm you had previously cast end.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 10 on a failure, or 5
on a success.
WHOLENESS OF BODY FOCUS 2
UNCOMMON HEALING MONK NECROMANCY POSITIVE
Cast [one-action] verbal
You heal yourself in one of the following ways, chosen by you
when you cast the spell.
• You regain 8 Hit Points.
• You attempt to cure one poison or disease afflicting
you; attempt to counteract the affliction.
Heightened (+1) If you choose to regain Hit Points, the Hit
Points regained increase by 8.
WILD WINDS STANCE FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON AIR EVOCATION MONK STANCE
Cast [one-action] somatic
Duration until you leave the stance
You take on the stance of the flowing winds, sending out waves
of energy at a distance. You can make wind crash unarmed
Strikes as ranged Strikes against targets within 30 feet. These
deal 1d6 bludgeoning damage, use the brawling group, and
have the agile, nonlethal, propulsive, and unarmed traits. Wind
crash Strikes ignore concealment and all cover.
While in wild winds stance, you gain a +2 circumstance
bonus to AC against ranged attacks.
WIND JUMP FOCUS 5
UNCOMMON AIR MONK TRANSMUTATION
Cast [one-action] verbal
Duration 1 minute
You gain a fly Speed equal to your Speed. You must end your
turn on solid ground, or you fall.
Heightened (6th) At the end of your turn, you can attempt
a DC 30 Acrobatics check to find purchase in midair. If you
succeed, you don’t fall.
SORCERER
Sorcerers can gain the following bloodline spells.
ABERRANT WHISPERS FOCUS 3
UNCOMMON AUDITORY ENCHANTMENT MENTAL SORCERER
Cast [one-action] to [three-actions] verbal
Area 5-foot emanation or more; Targets each foe in the area
Saving Throw Will; Duration 1 round
You utter phrases in an unknown tongue, assaulting the minds of
those nearby. Each target must attempt a Will save. Regardless
of the result of its save, each target is then temporarily immune
for 1 minute. You can increase the number of actions it takes
to Cast the Spell (to a maximum of 3 actions total). For each
additional action, increase the emanation’s radius by 5 feet, to a
maximum of 10 extra feet for 3 actions.
Success The target is unaffected.
Failure The target is stupefied 2.
Critical Failure The target is confused.
Heightened (+3) The initial radius increases by 5 feet.
ABYSSAL WRATH FOCUS 5
UNCOMMON EVOCATION SORCERER
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 60-foot cone
Saving Throw basic Reflex
You evoke the energy of an Abyssal realm. The damage types
of the spell (one energy and one physical) are based on the
result of rolling on the table below.
1d4 Realm Manifestation Damage Type
1 Skies Bolts of lightning Bludgeoning
 and flying debris and electricity
2 Depths Acid and demonic Acid and slashing
 shells
3 Frozen Frigid air and ice Bludgeoning and cold
4 Volcanic Jagged volcanic rocks Fire and piercing
 and magma
You deal 4d6 damage of each of the corresponding damage
types to each creature in the cone (8d6 total damage).
Heightened (+1) The damage for each type increases by 1d6.
ANCESTRAL MEMORIES FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON DIVINATION SORCERER
Cast [one-action] verbal
Duration 1 minute
The memories of long-dead spellcasters grant you
knowledge in a specific skill. Choose any non-Lore skill, or
a Lore skill related to the ancient empire from which your
bloodline sprang. You temporarily become trained in that
skill and might gain other memories associated with an
ancestor who was trained in that skill. If you attempt a task
or activity that lasts beyond this spell’s duration, use the
lower proficiency modifier.
Heightened (6th) You temporarily become an expert in the
skill you choose.
ANGELIC HALO FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON ABJURATION GOOD SORCERER
Cast [one-action] verbal
Area 15-foot emanation
Duration 1 minute
Core Rulebook
402
You gain an angelic halo with an aura that increases allies’
healing from the heal spell. Heal spells gain a +2 status bonus
to Hit Points healed to your allies in the area.
Heightened (+1) The status bonus increases by 2.
ANGELIC WINGS FOCUS 3
UNCOMMON EVOCATION LIGHT SORCERER
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 3 rounds
Wings of pure light spread out from your back, granting you a
fly Speed equal to your Speed. Your wings cast bright light in
a 30-foot radius. When this spell’s duration would end, if you’re
still flying, you float to the ground, as feather fall.
Heightened (5th) The duration increases to 1 minute.
ARCANE COUNTERMEASURE FOCUS 5
UNCOMMON ABJURATION SORCERER
Cast [reaction] somatic
Trigger A creature within range that you can see Casts a Spell.
Range 120 feet; Targets the spell cast by the triggering creature
You undermine the target spell, making it easier to defend
against. You reduce the spell’s level by 1, and targets of the
spell gain a +2 status bonus to any saving throws, skill checks,
AC, or DC against it.
You can’t reduce the spell’s level below its minimum. For
example, a 5th-level cone of cold would remain 5th-level, but
a 5th-level fireball would become 4th-level. Targets still gain
all the other benefits, even if you don’t reduce the spell’s level.
CELESTIAL BRAND FOCUS 5
UNCOMMON CURSE NECROMANCY SORCERER
Cast [one-action] somatic
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 evil creature
Duration 1 round
A blazing symbol appears on the target, marking it for divine
justice. You and your allies receive a +1 status bonus to your
attack rolls and skill checks against it. Anytime a good creature
damages it, the good creature deals an additional 1d4 good
damage. The target is then temporarily immune for 1 minute.
Heightened (+2) The good damage increases by 1.
DIABOLIC EDICT FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON ENCHANTMENT SORCERER
Casting [one-action] verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 willing living creature
Duration 1 round
You issue a diabolic edict, demanding the target perform a
particular task and offering rewards for its fulfillment. It gains
a +1 status bonus to attack rolls and skill checks related to
performing the task. If it refuses to perform the task you
proclaimed, it instead takes a –1 status penalty to all its attack
rolls and skill checks.
DRAGON BREATH FOCUS 3
UNCOMMON EVOCATION SORCERER
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 30-foot cone or 60-foot line originating from you
Saving Throw basic Reflex or Fortitude
You spew energy from your mouth, dealing 5d6 damage. The
area, damage type, and save depend on the dragon type in
your bloodline.
Dragon Type Area and Damage Type Saving Throw
Black or copper 60-foot line of acid Reflex
Blue or bronze 60-foot line of electricity Reflex
Brass 60-foot line of fire Reflex
Green 30-foot cone of poison Fortitude
Gold or red 30-foot cone of fire Reflex
Silver or white 30-foot cone of cold Reflex
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d6.
DRAGON CLAWS FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON MORPH SORCERER TRANSMUTATION
Cast [one-action] verbal
Duration 1 minute
Vicious claws grow from your fingers. They are finesse unarmed
attacks that deal 1d4 slashing damage and 1d6 extra damage
of a type determined by the dragon in your bloodline (see the
table in dragon breath). Your scales from blood magic glow with
faint energy, giving you resistance 5 to the same damage type.
Heightened (5th) The extra damage increases to 2d6, and the
resistance increases to 10.
Heightened (9th) The extra damage increases to 3d6, and the
resistance increases to 15.
DRAGON WINGS FOCUS 5
UNCOMMON MORPH SORCERER TRANSMUTATION
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
Leathery wings sprout from your back, giving you a fly Speed
of 60 feet or your Speed, whichever is faster. When this
spell’s duration would end, if you’re still flying, you float to
the ground, as feather fall. You can increase the Focus Point
cost by 1 to gain the effects of dragon claws as long as the
wings last.
Heightened (8th) The duration increases to 10 minutes.
DRAIN LIFE FOCUS 3
UNCOMMON NECROMANCY NEGATIVE SORCERER
Casting [one-action] somatic
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw basic Fortitude
You close your hand and pull life energy from another creature
into yourself. This deals 3d4 negative damage; the target
must attempt a basic Fortitude save. You gain temporary Hit
Points equal to the damage the target takes, after resolving
its save and applying your blood magic if applicable. If the
target’s Hit Points were lower than the damage you dealt, you
gain temporary Hit Points equal to their remaining Hit Points
instead. The temporary Hit Points last for 1 minute.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d4.
403
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
ELEMENTAL BLAST FOCUS 5
UNCOMMON EVOCATION SORCERER
Casting [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet (burst only); Area 10-foot-radius burst, 30-foot
cone, or 60-foot line
Saving Throw basic Reflex
You gather elemental energy and blast your foes in one
of the various listed shapes of your choosing, dealing 8d6
bludgeoning damage (or fire damage if your element is fire).
This spell has your element’s trait.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d6.
ELEMENTAL MOTION FOCUS 3
UNCOMMON EVOCATION SORCERER
Casting [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
You call upon your element to propel you, improving your Speed
depending on your element. This spell has your element’s trait.
• Air You gain a fly Speed equal to your Speed.
• Earth You gain a burrow Speed of 10 feet.
• Fire You gain a fly Speed equal to your Speed.
• Water You gain a swim Speed equal to your Speed and
can breathe underwater.
Heightened (6th) You also gain a +10-foot status bonus to
your Speeds.
Heightened (9th) The status bonus increases to +20 feet.
ELEMENTAL TOSS FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON ATTACK EVOCATION SORCERER
Casting [one-action] somatic
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
With a flick of your wrist, you fling a chunk of your elemental
matter at your foe. Make a spell attack roll, dealing 1d8
bludgeoning damage (or fire damage if your element is fire) on
a success, and double damage on a critical success. This spell
has your element’s trait.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d8.
EMBRACE THE PIT FOCUS 3
UNCOMMON EVIL MORPH SORCERER TRANSMUTATION
Casting [one-action] verbal
Duration 1 minute
Devil horns grow from your skull, and your skin takes on
features of the devil responsible for your diabolic bloodline.
You gain resistance 5 to evil, fire, and poison, and resistance 1
to physical damage (except silver). You can take good damage,
even if you aren’t evil, and you gain weakness 5 to good damage.
Heightened (+2) The resistance to evil, fire, and poison increases
by 5, the resistance to physical damage (except silver) by 2,
and the weakness to good damage by 5.
EXTEND SPELL FOCUS 3
UNCOMMON DIVINATION METAMAGIC SORCERER
Cast [one-action] verbal
You call upon your blood’s knowledge of the ancients to extend
your magic. If your next action is to Cast a Spell with a duration
of 1 minute on a single target, and the spell isn’t of the highest
spell level you can cast, the spell instead lasts 10 minutes. You
can have only one active spell at a time extended in this way.
FAERIE DUST FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON ENCHANTMENT MENTAL SORCERER
Cast [one-action] or more (somatic, verbal)
Range 30 feet; Area 5-foot burst or more
Saving Throw Will; Duration 1 round
You sprinkle magical dust in the spell’s area, making those
within easier to trick. Each creature in the area must attempt
a Will save. For each additional action you use Casting the
Spell, the burst’s radius increases by 5 feet.
Success The creature is unaffected.
Failure The creature can’t use reactions and takes a –2 status
penalty to Perception checks and Will saves.
Critical Failure As failure, and the creature also takes a –1
status penalty to Perception checks and Will saves for
1 minute.
Heightened (+3) The initial radius increases by 5 feet.
FEY DISAPPEARANCE FOCUS 3
UNCOMMON ENCHANTMENT SORCERER
Cast [one-action] somatic
Duration until the end of your next turn
You become invisible and ignore natural difficult terrain
(such as underbrush). Any hostile action you use ends this
invisibility, but you still ignore natural difficult terrain.
Heightened (5th) If you use a hostile action, the invisibility
doesn’t end.
FEY GLAMOUR FOCUS 5
UNCOMMON ILLUSION SORCERER
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Area 30-foot burst or Targets up to 10 creatures
Duration 10 minutes
You call upon fey glamours to cloak an area or the targets in
illusion. This has the effect of either illusory scene on the area
or veil on the creatures, as if heightened to a level 1 level lower
than fey glamour, using fey glamour’s range and duration.
GLUTTON’S JAWS FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON MORPH NECROMANCY SORCERER
Cast [one-action] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
Your mouth transforms into a shadowy maw bristling with
pointed teeth. These jaws are an unarmed attack with the
forceful trait dealing 1d8 piercing damage. If you hit with your
jaws and deal damage, you gain 1d6 temporary Hit Points.
Heightened (+2) The temporary Hit Points increase by 1d6.
GRASPING GRAVE FOCUS 5
UNCOMMON NECROMANCY SORCERER
Casting [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 60 feet; Area 20-foot radius on the ground
Saving Throw Reflex
Core Rulebook
404
Hundreds of skeletal arms erupt from the ground in the area,
clawing at creatures within and attempting to hold them in
place. The skeletal arms deal 6d6 slashing damage. Each
creature in the area must attempt a Reflex save.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature takes half damage.
Failure The creature takes full damage and a –10-foot
circumstance penalty to its Speeds for 1 round.
Critical Failure The creature takes double damage and is
immobilized for 1 round or until it Escapes.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d6.
HELLFIRE PLUME FOCUS 5
UNCOMMON EVIL EVOCATION FIRE SORCERER
Casting [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 60 feet; Area 10-foot radius, 60-foot-tall cylinder
Saving Throw basic Reflex
You call forth a plume of hellfire that erupts from below,
dealing 4d6 fire damage and 4d6 evil damage.
Heightened (+1) The fire damage increases by 1d6, and the evil
damage increases by 1d6.
HORRIFIC VISAGE FOCUS 3
UNCOMMON EMOTION FEAR ILLUSION MENTAL SORCERER VISUAL
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 30-foot-radius emanation centered on you
Saving Throw Will
You briefly transform your features into the horrific visage of
a hag, striking fear into your enemies. Foes in the area must
attempt a Will save.
Success The foe is unaffected.
Failure The foe is frightened 1.
Critical Failure The foe is frightened 2.
Heightened (5th) Foes in the area are frightened 1 on a
success, frightened 2 on a failure, and frightened 3 and fleeing
for 1 round on a critical failure. They are still unaffected on a
critical success.
JEALOUS HEX FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CURSE NECROMANCY SORCERER
Cast [one-action] verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration up to 1 minute
You draw forth a hag’s innate jealousy to deny a target its
greatest attribute. The target gains an adverse condition
depending on its highest ability modifier: Strength
(enfeebled); Dexterity (clumsy); Constitution (drained); or
Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma (stupefied). On a tie, the
creature decides which of the conditions associated with
the tied ability modifiers to take. The target must attempt
a Will save.
Success The target is unaffected.
Failure The condition’s value is 1.
Critical Failure The condition’s value is 2.
At the start of each of your turns, the target can attempt
another Will save, ending the effect on a success.
SWAMP OF SLOTH FOCUS 3
UNCOMMON CONJURATION SORCERER
Cast [one-action] to [three-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Area 5-foot burst or more
Saving Throw basic Fortitude; Duration 1 minute
Ground in the area turns swampy and fetid. The area is
difficult terrain. The sludge at the bottom of the morass
animates into diminutive sludge beasts that have a demonic
appearance. These don’t function as normal creatures, but
they swarm over creatures in the swamp and exude a noxious
stench. The swamp deals 1d6 poison damage; creatures that
end their turn in the area must attempt a basic Fortitude
save. You can increase the number of actions it takes to Cast
the Spell. For each additional action, increase the burst’s
radius by 5 feet.
Heightened (+2) The damage increases by 1d6, and the initial
radius increases by 5 feet.
TENTACULAR LIMBS FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON MORPH SORCERER TRANSMUTATION
Cast [one-action] somatic
Duration 1 minute
Your arms turn into long, pliable tentacles, increasing
your reach when you’re delivering touch range spells and
making unarmed Strikes with your arms (such as fist and
claw Strikes) to 10 feet. This doesn’t change the reach of
your melee weapon attacks. During the duration, whenever
you Cast a Spell, you can add an additional action to that
spell’s casting to temporarily extend your reach to 20 feet
to deliver that spell.
Heightened (+2) When you add an additional action to a spell
to temporarily extend your reach, your reach increases by an
additional 10 feet to deliver that spell.
TOUCH OF UNDEATH FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON NECROMANCY NEGATIVE SORCERER
Cast [one-action] somatic
Range touch; Targets 1 living creature touched
Saving Throw Will; Duration 1 minute
You instill within a creature the touch of the grave. For the
duration, harm spells treat the creature as undead and heal
spells treat the creature as living. In addition, harm spells gain
a +2 status bonus to the Hit Points restored to the target.
If the target wishes to avoid the spell, it can attempt a Will
save to reduce the effects.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target heals half as much from heal and takes half
as much damage from harm for 1 round.
Failure Effects as described in the text.
Heightened (+1) The status bonus to the Hit Points restored
increases by 2.
UNUSUAL ANATOMY FOCUS 5
UNCOMMON POLYMORPH SORCERER TRANSMUTATION
Cast [one-action] somatic
Duration 1 minute
405
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
You transform your flesh and organs into a bizarre amalgam
of glistening skin, rough scales, tufts of hair, and tumorous
protuberances. This has three effects:
• You gain resistance 10 to precision damage and
resistance 10 to extra damage from critical hits. If the
resistance is greater than the extra damage, it reduces
the extra damage to 0 but doesn’t reduce the attack’s
normal damage.
• You gain darkvision.
• Acid oozes from your skin. Any creature that hits you
with an unarmed attack or with a non-reach melee
weapon takes 2d6 acid damage.
Heightened (+2) The resistances increase by 5, and the acid
damage increases by 1d6.
YOU’RE MINE FOCUS 5
UNCOMMON EMOTION ENCHANTMENT INCAPACITATION MENTAL SORCERER
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration 1 round
You manipulate the target’s emotions, potentially allowing
you to control it for a brief instant. The target must attempt
a Will save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target is stunned 1.
Failure On the target’s next turn, it’s stunned 1 and you
partially control it, causing it to take a single action of your
choice. If it has actions left, it can act normally.
Critical Failure The target is controlled for 1 round.
Heightened (7th) On a failure, the target is controlled for 1
round. On a critical failure, the target is controlled for up to
1 minute; it receives a new Will save at the end of each of its
turns, and on a success, the spell ends.
WIZARD
Wizards can gain the following school spells.
AUGMENT SUMMONING FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CONJURATION WIZARD
Cast [one-action] verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature you summoned
You augment the abilities of a summoned creature. The
target gains a +1 status bonus to all checks (this also applies
to the creature’s DCs, including its AC) for the duration of its
summoning, up to 1 minute.
CALL OF THE GRAVE FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON ARCANE ATTACK NECROMANCY WIZARD
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 living creature
You fire a ray of sickening energy. Make a spell attack roll.
Critical Success The target becomes sickened 2 and slowed 1
as long as it’s sickened.
Success The target becomes sickened 1.
Failure The target is unaffected.
CHARMING WORDS FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON AUDITORY ENCHANTMENT INCAPACITATION LINGUISTIC
MENTAL WIZARD
Cast [one-action] verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration until the start of your next turn
You whisper enchanting words to deflect your foe’s ire. The
target must attempt a Will save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target takes a –1 circumstance penalty to attack
rolls and damage rolls against you.
Failure The target can’t use hostile actions against you.
Critical Failure The target is stunned 1 and can’t use hostile
actions against you.
DIMENSIONAL STEPS FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON CONJURATION TELEPORTATION WIZARD
Cast [one-action] somatic
Range 20 feet
You teleport to a location up to 20 feet away within your line
of sight.
Heightened (+1) The distance you can teleport increases by
5 feet.
DIVINER’S SIGHT FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON CONCENTRATE DIVINATION FORTUNE WIZARD
Cast [one-action] verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 willing living creature
Duration until the end of your next turn
You glimpse into the target’s future. Roll a d20; when the target
attempts a non-secret saving throw or skill check, it can use
the number you rolled instead of rolling, and the spell ends.
Alternatively, you can instead reveal the result of the die roll
for one of the target’s secret checks during the duration, and
the spell ends. Casting it again ends any active diviner’s sight
you have cast, as well as any active diviner’s sight on the target.
DREAD AURA FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON ENCHANTMENT EMOTION FEAR MENTAL WIZARD
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 30-foot-radius emanation centered on you
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You emit an aura of terror. Foes in the area are frightened 1
and unable to reduce the condition.
ELEMENTAL TEMPEST FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON EVOCATION METAMAGIC WIZARD
Cast [one-action] verbal
Your spellcasting surrounds you in a storm of elemental energy.
If the next action you take is to Cast a Spell from your wizard
spell slots that’s an evocation spell dealing acid, cold, electricity,
or fire damage, a 10-foot emanation of energy surrounds you
as you cast the spell. Foes in the area take 1d6 damage per
spell level of the spell you just cast of the same damage type
the spell deals (choose one if it deals multiple types). Combine
the damage from both elemental tempest and the other spell
Core Rulebook
406
against foes who take damage from both before applying
bonuses, penalties, resistance, weakness, and the like.
ENERGY ABSORPTION FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON ABJURATION WIZARD
Cast [reaction] verbal
Trigger An effect would deal acid, cold, electricity, or fire
damage to you.
You gain resistance 15 to acid, cold, electricity, or fire damage
from the triggering effect (one type of your choice). The
resistance applies only to the triggering effect’s initial damage.
Heightened (+1) The resistance increases by 5.
FORCE BOLT FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON ATTACK EVOCATION FORCE WIZARD
Cast [one-action] somatic
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature or object
You fire an unerring dart of force from your fingertips. It
automatically hits and deals 1d4+1 force damage to the target.
Heightened (+2) The damage increases by 1d4+1.
HAND OF THE APPRENTICE FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON ATTACK EVOCATION WIZARD
Cast [one-action] somatic
Range 500 feet; Targets 1 creature
You hurl a held melee weapon with which you are trained at
the target, making a spell attack roll. On a success, you deal
the weapon’s damage as if you had hit with a melee Strike,
but adding your spellcasting ability modifier to damage,
rather than your Strength modifier. On a critical success,
you deal double damage, and you add the weapon’s critical
specialization effect. Regardless of the outcome, the weapon
flies back to you and returns to your hand.
INVISIBILITY CLOAK FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON ILLUSION WIZARD
Cast [two-actions] somatic
Duration 1 minute
You become invisible, with the same restrictions as the 2ndlevel invisibility spell.
Heightened (6th) The duration increases to 10 minutes.
Heightened (8th) The duration increases to 1 hour.
LIFE SIPHON FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON HEALING NECROMANCY WIZARD
Cast [reaction] verbal
Trigger You expend one of your wizard spell slots to cast a
wizard spell of the necromancy school.
You use some of the spell’s magic to heal yourself, regaining
1d8 Hit Points per level of the spell.
PHYSICAL BOOST FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON TRANSMUTATION WIZARD
Cast [one-action] verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 living creature
Duration until the end of the target’s next turn
You temporarily improve the target’s physique. The target
gains a +2 status bonus to the next Acrobatics check, Athletics
check, Fortitude save, or Reflex save it attempts.
PROTECTIVE WARD FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON ABJURATION WIZARD
Cast [one-action] somatic
Area 5-foot-radius emanation centered on you
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You emanate a shimmering aura of protective magic. You and
any allies in the area gain a +1 status bonus to AC. Each time
you Sustain the Spell, the emanation’s radius increases by 5
feet, to a maximum of 30 feet.
SHIFTING FORM FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON MORPH TRANSMUTATION WIZARD
Cast [one-action] somatic
Duration 1 minute
You gain one of the following abilities of your choice. You can
Dismiss this spell.
• You gain a 20-foot status bonus to your Speed.
• You gain a climb or swim Speed equal to half your Speed.
• You gain darkvision.
• You gain a pair of claws. These are agile finesse
unarmed attacks that deal 1d8 slashing damage.
• You gain scent 60 feet (imprecise).
VIGILANT EYE FOCUS 4
UNCOMMON DIVINATION WIZARD
Cast [one-action] somatic
Range 500 feet
Duration 1 hour
You create an invisible eye sensor, as clairvoyance (page 324).
When created, this eye must be in your line of sight.
When the spell’s duration ends, you can spend 1 Focus
Point as a free action to extend the duration for another hour,
though as normal, it ends immediately during your next daily
preparations.
WARPED TERRAIN FOCUS 1
UNCOMMON ILLUSION VISUAL WIZARD
Cast [one-action] to [three-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 60 feet; Area 5-foot burst or more
Duration 1 minute
You create illusory hazards that cover all surfaces in the area
(typically the ground). Any creature moving through the illusion
treats the squares as difficult terrain. A creature can attempt
to disbelieve the effect as normal after using a Seek action or
otherwise spending actions interacting with the illusion. If it
successfully disbelieves, it ignores the effect for the remaining
duration. For each additional action you use casting the spell,
the burst’s radius increases by 5 feet, to a maximum of 10 extra
feet for 3 actions.
Heightened (4th) You can make the illusion appear in the air
rather than on a surface, causing it to function as difficult
terrain for flying creatures.
407
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Casting Rituals
When you take charge of a ritual, you are its primary
caster, and others assisting you are secondary casters. You
can be a primary caster for a ritual even if you can’t cast
spells. You must know the ritual, and the ritual’s spell
level can be no higher than half your level rounded up.
You must also have the required proficiency rank in
the skill used for the ritual’s primary check (see Checks
below), and as the primary caster, you must attempt this
skill check to determine the ritual’s effects. The primary
skill check determines the tradition.
Rituals do not require spell slots to cast. You can
heighten a ritual up to half your level rounded up, decided
when the ritual is initiated. A ritual always takes at least
1 hour to perform, and often longer. While a ritual is a
downtime activity, it’s possible—albeit risky—to perform
a ritual during exploration with enough uninterrupted
time. A ritual’s casting time is usually listed in days. Each
day of casting requires 8 hours of participation in the
ritual from all casters, with breaks during multiday rituals
to allow rest. One caster can continue a multiday ritual,
usually with some light chanting or meditation, while the
other casters rest. All rituals require material, somatic,
and verbal components throughout their casting time.
Learning Rituals
Learning a ritual does not count against any limits on
spells in your spell repertoire or on any other normal
spellcasting ability. Rituals are never common, though if
you look hard, you can probably find someone who can
perform an uncommon ritual for you. They may still be
unwilling to teach it to you.
Cost
A ritual’s Cost entry lists valuable components required to
cast the ritual. If a ritual doesn’t have any such components,
it won’t have a Cost entry. The cost is consumed when you
attempt the primary skill check. Costs are often presented
as a base cost multiplied by the target’s level and sometimes
the spell’s level. If the target’s level is lower than 1, multiply
the cost by 1 instead. Heightened versions that increase
the base cost multiply it by the target’s level or another
value as appropriate. Most rituals that create permanent
creatures, such as create undead, use costs based on the
level of the spell, as presented on Table 7–1.
Secondary Casters
Many rituals need additional secondary casters, who also
don’t need to be able to cast spells. Unlike a primary caster,
a secondary caster doesn’t need a minimum level or skill
proficiency. The Secondary Casters entry, if present, indicates
the minimum number of secondary casters required.
Checks
At the ritual’s culmination, you must attempt the skill
check listed in the Primary Check entry to determine the
ritual’s outcome. Primary checks usually have a very hard
DC for a level that’s twice the ritual’s spell level. As with
other downtime activities, fortune and misfortune effects
can’t modify your checks for the ritual, nor can bonuses
or penalties that aren’t active throughout the process.
The GM can adjust the DCs of rituals, add or change
primary or secondary checks, or even waive requirements
to fit specific circumstances. For example, performing a
ritual in a location where ley lines converge on the night
of a new moon might make a normally difficult ritual
drastically easier.
Secondary Checks
Often, a ritual requires secondary checks to represent aspects
of its casting, usually with a standard DC for a level twice
the ritual’s spell level. A different secondary caster must
attempt each secondary check. If there are more secondary
casters than checks, the others don’t attempt any.
Secondary casters attempt their checks before you
attempt the primary check; no matter their results, the
ritual proceeds to the primary check. Secondary checks
Rituals
A ritual is an esoteric and complex spell that anyone can cast. It takes much longer to cast
a ritual than a normal spell, but rituals can have more powerful effects.
TABLE 7–1: CREATURE CREATION RITUALS
Creature Level Spell Level Required Cost
–1 or 0 2 15 gp
1 2 60 gp
2 3 105 gp
3 3 180 gp
4 4 300 gp
5 4 480 gp
6 5 750 gp
7 5 1,080 gp
8 6 1,500 gp
9 6 2,100 gp
10 7 3,000 gp
11 7 4,200 gp
12 8 6,000 gp
13 8 9,000 gp
14 9 13,500 gp
15 9 19,500 gp
16 10 30,000 gp
17 10 45,000 gp
Core Rulebook
408
affect the primary check depending on their results.
Critical Success You gain a +2 circumstance bonus to the
primary check.
Success No bonus or penalty.
Failure You take a –4 circumstance penalty to the primary
check.
Critical Failure As failure, and you reduce the degree of
success of the primary skill check by one step.
Effect
A ritual’s effect depends on the result of the primary check.
If an effect lists a save DC, use your spell DC for the ritual’s
magic tradition (or 12 + your level + your highest mental
ability modifier, if you don’t have a spell DC).
Rituals
The following rituals are just a small sample of the many
that exist.
ANIMATE OBJECT RITUAL 2
UNCOMMON TRANSMUTATION
Cast 1 day; Cost rare oils, see Table 7–1; Secondary Casters 1
Primary Check Arcana (expert); Secondary Checks Crafting
Range 10 feet; Target 1 object
You transform the target into an animated object with a level
up to that allowed by Table 7–1 and of a type corresponding
to the object (so a broom would become an animated broom).
Critical Success The target becomes an animated object of the
appropriate type. If it’s at least 4 levels lower than you, you
can make it a minion. This gives it the minion trait, meaning
it can use 2 actions when you command it, and commanding
it is a single action that has the auditory and concentrate
traits. You can have a maximum of four minions under your
control. If it doesn’t become a minion, you can give it one
simple command. It pursues that goal single-mindedly,
ignoring any of your subsequent commands.
Success As critical success, except an animated object that
doesn’t become your minion stays in place and attacks
anyone that attacks it or tries to steal or move it, rather
than following your command.
Failure You fail to create the animated object.
Critical Failure You create the animated object, but it goes
berserk and attempts to destroy you.
ATONE RITUAL 4
UNCOMMON ABJURATION
Cast 1 day; Cost rare incense and offerings worth a total value
of 20 gp × the target’s level; Secondary Casters 1, must be
the ritual’s target
Primary Check Nature or Religion (expert); Secondary Checks
Nature or Religion (whichever is used for the primary check)
Range 10 feet; Targets another creature of up to 8th level who
is a worshipper of the same deity or philosophy as you
You attempt to help a truly penitent creature atone for its
misdeeds, typically actions contrary to your deity’s alignment
or anathema to your deity. If the creature isn’t truly penitent,
the outcome is always a critical failure. This ritual uses Nature
if the target is a druid, and Religion in all other cases.
Critical Success The creature receives absolution for its
misdeeds, allowing it to regain standing with your deity. It
returns to its previous alignment (if its alignment shifted)
and regains any abilities it lost. Before the atonement is
complete, the creature must perform a special quest or
other task chosen by your deity, as befits its misdeeds. If
completed during downtime, this task should take no less
than 1 month. For 1 month, the target receives divine insight
just before performing an act that would be anathema to
your deity or contrary to your deity’s alignment.
Success As critical success, but the creature gains no special
insight regarding its subsequent actions.
Failure The creature does not receive absolution and must
continue to meditate and redress its misdeeds. Any future
atone rituals for the same misdeeds cost half as much and gain
a +4 circumstance bonus to primary and secondary checks.
Critical Failure The creature offends your deity and is
permanently cast out from the faith. The creature can’t
rejoin your religion without a more direct intervention.
Heightened (5th) Increase the maximum target level by 2 and
the base cost by 20 gp.
AWAKEN ANIMAL RITUAL 6
UNCOMMON DIVINATION MENTAL
Cast 1 day; Cost herbs, 1/5 the value on Table 7–1; Secondary
Casters 3
Primary Check Nature (master); Secondary Checks Lore (any),
Society, Survival
Range 10 feet; Target 1 animal of up to the level on Table 7–1
TABLE 7–2: RITUALS BY LEVEL
Level Ritual
 2 Animate object
 2 Consecrate
 2 Create undead
 2 Inveigle
 3 Geas
 4 Atone
 4 Blight
 4 Plant growth
 5 Call spirit
 5 Planar ally
 5 Resurrect
 6 Awaken animal
 6 Commune
 6 Commune with nature
 6 Planar binding
 6 Primal call
 7 Legend lore
 8 Control weather
 8 Freedom
 8 Imprisonment
409
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
You grant intelligence to the target, transforming it into
a beast. If it was previously an animal companion or minion, it
can no longer serve as one.
Critical Success The target’s Intelligence, Wisdom, and
Charisma modifiers each increase to +2 if they were lower,
and it becomes helpful to you for awakening it.
Success The target’s Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma
modifiers increase to +0 if they were worse and it becomes
friendly to you for awakening it.
Failure You fail to awaken the target.
Critical Failure You accidentally awaken the target with a
pure bestial hatred toward you. The target’s Intelligence,
Wisdom, and Charisma modifiers increase to –2 if they were
worse. It becomes hostile to you, attempting to destroy you.
BLIGHT RITUAL 4
UNCOMMON NECROMANCY NEGATIVE PLANT
Cast 1 day; Secondary Casters 1
Primary Check Nature (expert); Secondary Checks Survival
Area 1/2-mile-radius circle centered on you
Duration 1 year
You twist and stunt plants in the area, causing them to wither. In
addition to other dangers from failing plant life, this decreases
the crop yield for farms. If you cast this ritual in an area affected
by plant growth, blight attempts to counteract plant growth
instead of producing its usual effect.
Critical Success Completely spoil the crop yield in the area, or
decrease the yield by half in an area with up to a 1-mile radius.
Success Decease the crop yield in the area by half.
Failure The ritual has no effect.
Critical Failure The flora in the area changes in an unexpected
way, determined by the GM but generally as contradictory
to your true desires as possible (for instance, enriching
crops when you would prefer to blight them).
CALL SPIRIT RITUAL 5
UNCOMMON NECROMANCY
Cast 1 hour; Cost rare candles and incense worth a total value
of 50 gp; Secondary Casters 1
Primary Check Occultism (expert) or Religion (expert);
Secondary Checks Occultism or Religion (whichever isn’t
used for the primary check)
Duration up to 10 minutes
You tear the veil to the afterlife and call a spirit from its final
resting place. You must call the spirit by name, and you must
provide a connection to the spirit, such as a possession, a
garment, or a piece of its corpse. A spirit unwilling to heed your
call can attempt a Will save to avoid it; on a critical success, a
trickster spirit Impersonates the spirit you meant to call. The DC
of the Will save is 2 lower if you haven’t met the spirit in life.
Either way, the spirit appears as a wispy form of the creature
you meant to call. Each minute of the duration, you can ask the
spirit a question. It can answer how it pleases or even refuse to
answer. If the spirit isn’t in the afterlife (such as if it’s an undead),
all results other than critical failures use the failure effect.
Critical Success The spirit is particularly cooperative, and
even if it has strong reasons to deceive you, it takes a –2
circumstance penalty to its Deception checks.
Success You call the spirit.
Failure You fail to call a spirit.
Critical Failure One or more evil spirits appear and attack.
COMMUNE RITUAL 6
UNCOMMON DIVINATION PREDICTION
Cast 1 day; Cost rare incense worth a total value of 150 gp;
Secondary Casters 1
Primary Check Occultism (master) or Religion (master);
Secondary Checks Occultism or Religion (whichever is used
for the primary check)
Duration up to 10 minutes
You call upon an unknown planar entity to answer questions;
this is a servitor of your deity if you have one and use
Religion. You can ask up to seven questions that could be
answered with “Yes” or “No.” The entity is likely to know
answers related to its purview; a servitor of Gozreh would
likely know about unnatural weather patterns and a servitor
of Desna would likely know someone’s travel route. The
entity answers with one word answers such as “Yes,” “No,”
“Likely,” and “Unknown,” though its answers always reflect
its own agenda and could be deceptive.
Critical Success You contact a more powerful entity aligned
strongly with your interests, possibly even your deity. The
entity won’t attempt to deceive you, though it still might not
know the answers. When it’s important to provide clarity, the
entity will answer your questions with up to five words, such
as “If you leave immediately” or “That was true once.”
Success You can ask your questions and receive answers.
Failure You fail to contact a planar entity.
Critical Failure You are exposed to the enormity of the cosmos
and are stupefied 4 for 1 week (can’t remove by any means).
COMMUNE WITH NATURE RITUAL 6
UNCOMMON DIVINATION PREDICTION
Cast 1 day; Cost rare incense worth a total value of 60 gp;
Secondary Casters 1
Primary Check Nature (master); Secondary Checks Nature
Duration up to 10 minutes
As commune, except you contact the primal spirits of
nature, which know about animals, beasts, fey, plants,
topography, and natural resources within a 3-mile radius of
the ritual’s location.
CONSECRATE RITUAL 2
UNCOMMON CONSECRATION EVOCATION
Cast 3 days; Cost rare incense and offerings worth a total
value of 20 gp × the spell level; Secondary Casters 2, must
be worshippers of your religion
Primary Check Religion; Secondary Checks Crafting, Performance
Range 40 feet; Area 40-foot-radius burst around an immobile
altar, shrine, or fixture of your deity
Duration 1 year
You consecrate a site to your deity, chanting praises and
Core Rulebook
410
creating a sacred space. While within the area, worshippers
of your deity gain a +1 status bonus to attack rolls, skill
checks, saving throws, and Perception checks, and creatures
anathema to your deity (such as undead for Pharasma or
Sarenrae) take a –1 status penalty to those checks. Attacks
made by worshippers of your deity within the area deal 1
damage of one of your deity’s alignment types (your choice);
if your deity is true neutral, you don’t gain this benefit.
Critical Success The consecration succeeds, and it either lasts
for 10 years instead of 1 or covers an area with twice the
radius. Occasionally, with your deity’s favor, this might
produce an even more amazing effect, such as a permanently
consecrated area or the effect covering an entire cathedral.
Success The consecration succeeds.
Failure The consecration fails.
Critical Failure The consecration fails spectacularly and
angers your deity, who sends a sign of displeasure. For at
least 1 year, further attempts to consecrate the site fail.
Heightened (7th) The consecrated area also gains the effects
of the dimensional lock spell, but the effect doesn’t attempt
to counteract teleportation by worshippers of your deity. The
cost increases to 200 gp × the spell level.
CONTROL WEATHER RITUAL 8
UNCOMMON EVOCATION
Cast 1 day; Secondary Casters 1
Primary Check Nature (master); Secondary Checks Survival
Area 2-mile-radius circle centered on you
Duration 4d12 hours
You alter the weather, making it calm and normal for the season
or choosing up to two effects based on the season:
• Spring drizzle, heat, hurricane, sleet, thunderstorm,
tornado
• Summer drizzle, downpour, extreme heat, hail, heat
• Autumn cold weather, fog, mild heat, sleet
• Winter blizzard, mild cold, extreme cold, thaw
You can’t specifically control the manifestations, such as the
exact path of a tornado or the targets of lightning strikes.
Critical Success You change the weather as desired and can
affect a larger area (up to a 5-mile-radius circle), or a longer
duration (any number of additional d12 hours, up to 16d12).
Success You change the weather as desired.
Failure You fail to change the weather as desired.
Critical Failure The weather changes in an unanticipated way,
determined by the GM but generally as contradictory to
your true desires as possible (for instance, a terrible storm
emerges when you would prefer good weather).
Heightened (9th) You can create unseasonable weather and
contradictory weather effects, such as extreme cold and
a hurricane. You can make the weather calm and normal
weather for a different season or choose weather effects from
any season’s list.
CREATE UNDEAD RITUAL 2
UNCOMMON EVIL NECROMANCY
Cast 1 day; Cost black onyx, see Table 7–1; Secondary Casters 1
Primary Check Arcana (expert), Occultism (expert), or Religion
(expert); Secondary Checks Religion
Range 10 feet; Target 1 dead creature
You transform the target into an undead creature with
a level up to that allowed in Table 7–1. There are many
versions of this ritual, each specific to a particular type
of undead (one ritual for all zombies, one for skeletons,
one for ghouls, and so on), and the rituals that create rare
undead are also rare. Some forms of undead, such as liches,
form using their own unique methods and can’t be created
with a version of create undead.
Critical Success The target becomes an undead creature of the
appropriate type. If it’s at least 4 levels lower than you, you
can make it a minion. This gives it the minion trait, meaning
it can use 2 actions when you command it, and commanding
it is a single action that has the auditory and concentrate
traits. You can have a maximum of four minions under your
control. If it’s intelligent and doesn’t become a minion, the
undead is helpful to you for awakening it, though it’s still
a horrid and evil creature. If it’s unintelligent and doesn’t
become a minion, you can give it one simple command. It
pursues that goal single-mindedly, ignoring any of your
subsequent commands.
Success As critical success, except an intelligent undead that
doesn’t become your minion is only friendly to you, and
an unintelligent undead that doesn’t become your minion
leaves you alone unless you attack it. It marauds the local
area rather than following your command.
Failure You fail to create the undead.
Critical Failure You create the undead, but its soul, tortured by
your foul necromancy, is full of nothing but hatred for you.
It attempts to destroy you.
FREEDOM RITUAL 8
UNCOMMON ABJURATION
Cast 1 day; Cost valuable oils and objects associated with the
target worth a total value of 100 gp × the spell level × the
target’s level; Secondary Casters 2
Primary Check Arcana (legendary) or Occultism (legendary);
Secondary Checks Society
Range see text; Target 1 creature
You perform a ritual to free a creature imprisoned, petrified,
or otherwise put into stasis by any magical effects from all
such effects, even effects like imprisonment that don’t have a
duration, as long as freedom’s spell level is equal to or higher
than the effect’s spell level. To perform the ritual, you must
be within 10 feet of the target, or within 10 feet of the place
where the target was imprisoned (in the case of effects that
trap the creature in an unreachable prison, like the oubliette
form of imprisonment). You must know the name of the
creature and details of its background; if the creature is not
a close associate, a failure or critical failure on a secondary
Society check reduces even a critical success on the primary
check to a failure.
Critical Success You free the target from all magical effects
imprisoning it, petrifying it, or putting it into stasis. It gains
411
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
a +1 status bonus to saving throws to resist those same
magical effects for 1 week.
Success You free the target from all magical effects imprisoning
it, petrifying it, or putting it into stasis.
Failure You fail to free the target.
Critical Failure The magical effects imprisoning the target,
petrifying the target, or putting it into stasis affect you and
all secondary casters.
GEAS RITUAL 3
UNCOMMON CURSE ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Cast 1 day; Secondary Casters 1
Primary Check Arcana (expert), Occultism (expert), or Religion
(expert); Secondary Checks Society or Legal Lore
Range 10 feet; Target 1 creature of a level no greater than
double the geas ritual’s level
Duration see text
You enforce a magic rule on a willing target, forcing it to
either perform or refrain from carrying out a certain act. A
geas to perform an act is usually conditional, such as, “Always
offer hospitality to strangers seeking a place to stay.” An
unconditional geas to perform a certain act doesn’t require the
target to perform that act exclusively, though it must prioritize
the task above all leisurely pursuits. The most common geas
to refrain from carrying out an act is a specification to avoid
violating a contract. In those cases, the secondary caster
usually takes charge of making sure the wording of the
contract is attuned correctly with the ritual’s magic. Because
the target is willing, geas can have a duration that lasts for
as long as the target agrees to. If the target is unable to fulfill
the geas, it becomes sickened 1, and the sickened condition
increases by 1 for each consecutive day it is prevented from
following the geas, to a maximum of sickened 4. The sickened
condition ends immediately when it follows the geas again; it
can’t remove the sickened condition in any other way. Only
powerful magic such as a wish spell can remove the effects of
geas from a willing target.
Critical Success The geas succeeds, and the target receives a
+1 status bonus to skill checks that directly uphold the geas
(at the GM’s discretion).
Success The geas succeeds.
Failure The geas fails.
Critical Failure The geas fails, and you are instead affected
by the geas you were attempting to place on the target.
You are considered an unwilling target, so the geas can be
counteracted with a remove curse spell.
Heightened (5th) You can use geas on an unwilling creature;
it can attempt a Will save to negate the effect. If the target
fails this Will save, the geas lasts up to 1 week. A remove
curse spell can counteract a geas on an unwilling creature,
in addition to powerful magic such as a wish spell. A clever
unwilling creature can subvert the geas by contriving
situations that prevent it from complying, but in that case it
becomes sickened (as described above).
Heightened (7th) As 5th level, but the geas lasts for up to
1 year on an unwilling creature.
Heightened (9th) As 5th level, but the geas lasts for a duration
you choose (even unlimited) on an unwilling creature.
IMPRISONMENT RITUAL 8
UNCOMMON EVOCATION
Cast 1 day; Cost reagents to construct the magical prison
worth a total value of 800 gp × the target’s level; Secondary
Casters 6
Primary Check Arcana (legendary) or Occultism (legendary);
Secondary Checks Crafting, Society
Range 10 feet; Target 1 creature of up to 16th level
You perform a ritual to imprison a creature in one of
several forms. While some versions of this ritual offer all
of the forms, others include only a single form or only a
few of them. Whichever form you use, the effect can’t be
counteracted, though it can be ended by freedom. Some forms
of imprisonment can be ended by other means. Because the
ritual requires the target to remain within 10 feet at all times,
it typically requires you to subdue the target first.
• Chains You bind the creature with chains, rendering it
unable to use any actions other than to speak. Other
creatures that attempt to approach, harm the chains,
or free the trapped creature in any way must succeed
at a Will save or be unable to do so forever. The
chains have Hardness equal to 5 × the imprisonment
ritual’s spell level, and double that many Hit Points.
Destroying the chains frees the target.
• Prison You render the creature completely unable to
leave a particular confined area or structure of your
choice, such as a jail cell or sealed cave. The magic also
prevents the creature from damaging its prison, either
directly or indirectly, to break free. If the creature’s
prison is entirely destroyed by some external force,
the creature is freed, though for some larger or natural
prisons, this might be unfeasible.
• Slumber (sleep effect) You put the creature into an eternal
sleep. It ceases aging and doesn’t require food or drink. A
single sincere physical display of affection from a creature
who genuinely loves the target—whether romantically,
filially, or otherwise—frees it from the slumber. This form
of imprisonment is also enchantment magic.
• Temporal Stasis You send the creature into a state of
suspended animation outside the flow of time. The
creature doesn’t grow older and can’t be affected by any
effect from within the normal timestream. While casting
this ritual, you can optionally name any amount of time
for the stasis; after this duration elapses, the stasis ends.
Unlike other forms of imprisonment, temporal stasis can
be counteracted by a dispel magic or haste spell. This
form of imprisonment is also transmutation magic.
• Object (9th level or higher) You either shrink the creature
to an inch in height or transform it into an insubstantial
form whose body trails away into wisps below its head.
Either way, you trap it inside a gem, jar, bottle, lamp, or
similar container. The creature ceases aging and doesn’t
require food or drink. The creature is still aware of its
Core Rulebook
412
surroundings and can move within the container and
speak, but it can’t use any other  actions. Destroying
the container kills the target rather than freeing it. This
form of imprisonment is also transmutation magic.
• Oubliette (10th level only) You entomb the target
in a state of suspended animation deep beneath the
surface of the ground and out of tune with reality so
that it can’t be reached by any means. You also prevent
divinations from revealing the location where the
imprisonment occurred. Powerful magic such as wish
can reveal the location of the imprisonment, but even
such magic can’t free the target from the oubliette;
only a 10th-level freedom ritual can do so.
Critical Success You imprison the target. You can either use a
form of imprisonment that usually requires 1 additional spell
level, or give any creatures trying to use a freedom ritual
to rescue the target a –2 circumstance penalty to checks
associated with that ritual.
Success You imprison the target.
Failure You fail to imprison the target.
Critical Failure You imprison yourself and the secondary casters
in the same way you intended to imprison the target.
Heightened (9th) You can use the object form of imprisonment
in addition to the other options, and you can target a creature
of up to 18th level. The base cost increases to 2,000 gp.
Heightened (10th) You can use the object and oubliette forms
of imprisonment in addition to the other options, and you can
target a creature of up to 20th level. The base cost increases
to 6,000 gp.
INVEIGLE RITUAL 2
UNCOMMON ENCHANTMENT MENTAL
Cast 1 day; Cost rare oils worth a total value of 10 gp × the
target’s level
Primary Check Arcana (expert), Occultism (expert), or
Religion (expert)
Range 10 feet; Target 1 creature of a level no greater than
double the inveigle ritual’s level
Duration 1 year or until dismissed
You win over the target’s mind, causing it to see you as a close
and trusted friend and look upon your every suggestion as
reasonable. The target is helpful toward you, so it will go out
of its way to help you. As with any other helpful creature,
there are limits to what you can ask of it. If you ever ask
the target to do something completely against its nature or
needlessly harmful to the target or its interests, not only does
it refuse, but it also can attempt a Will save to end the effect
early. Because of the casting time and range, it’s generally
difficult to cast this ritual unless the target is willing (perhaps
convinced the ritual will have some other effect) or restrained.
If the creature is unwilling to accept the ritual, it can attempt
a Will save to negate the effect.
Critical Success The ritual succeeds and the target takes a –4
status penalty to Will saves to end the effect.
Success The ritual succeeds.
Failure The ritual fails.
Critical Failure The ritual fails and the target instead hates
you, becoming hostile to you for the duration.
Heightened (6th) You can use inveigle on a creature up to 1
mile away throughout the casting, as long as you have a lock
of hair, a drop of blood, or some other piece of the creature’s
body, which you mix into the oils used in the cost. The base cost
increases to 100 gp. The duration is shorter than normal, based
on how large a piece of the creature’s body you use. Blood, hair,
scales, and the like cause the ritual to last 1 week, while a hand
or other substantial body part causes the ritual to last 1 month.
LEGEND LORE RITUAL 7
UNCOMMON DIVINATION
Cast 1 day; Cost rare incense worth a total value of 300 gp;
Secondary Casters 2
Primary Check Occultism (master); Secondary Checks
Performance, Society
You attempt to learn useful legends about a particular
subject, which must be an important person, place, or thing.
If the subject is present, increase the degree of success of
your primary skill check by one step. If you have only vague
information about the subject before attempting the ritual,
decrease the degree of success of your primary skill check by
one step. These modifiers cancel each other out if you have a
subject present with little to no baseline information.
Critical Success You recite legends, tales, and lore about the
subject over the course of an hour after the ritual ends. The
information is mostly coherent, emphasizing more accurate
or useful legends over those exaggerated over time.
Success You recite mysterious legends, tales, and lore about
the subject over the course of an hour after the ritual ends.
These provide useful information for further inquiry but are
generally incomplete or enigmatic. As is the nature of legends,
you are likely to learn multiple contradictory versions.
Failure You fail to learn any useful legends.
Critical Failure Your mind becomes lost in the past. You can’t
sense or respond to anything in the present for 1 week except
to perform necessities like breathing and sleeping. When you
return, however, you can retrain one of your skills into a Lore
based on the knowledge of the past you were uncontrollably
viewing, as if you had spent 1 week retraining.
PLANAR ALLY RITUAL 5
UNCOMMON CONJURATION
Cast 1 day; Cost rare incense and offerings worth a total value
of 2 gp × the spell level × the target’s level; Secondary
Casters 2, must share your religion
Primary Check Religion (expert); Secondary Checks Diplomacy
Duration see text
You call upon your deity to grant you aid in the form of a
divine servitor of your deity’s choice of a level no greater than
double planar ally’s spell level. While performing this ritual,
the secondary casters entreat your deity, explaining what
sort of assistance you need and why you need it; if the task is
incredibly fitting to your deity, the GM can grant a circumstance
bonus to the secondary Diplomacy check or rule that the check
413
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
is automatically a critical success. If the ritual succeeds, you
must offer the servitor payment depending on factors such
as the duration and danger of the task. Payment always costs
at least as much as a consumable item of the creature’s level,
even for a short and simple task, and it often costs as much
as a permanent magic item of the creature’s level to persuade
a creature to fight alongside you. If you use the ritual without
good reason, the result is automatically a critical failure.
Critical Success Your deity sends a servitor, and the servitor’s
payment costs only half as much as normal. If you ask for a
particular servitor by name, your deity is likely to send that
servitor unless the servitor is busy.
Success Your deity sends a servitor.
Failure Your deity does not send a servitor.
Critical Failure Your deity is offended and sends a sign of
displeasure or possibly even a servitor to scold or attack you,
depending on your deity’s nature. You must conduct an atone
ritual to regain your former standing with your deity.
PLANAR BINDING RITUAL 6
UNCOMMON ABJURATION CONJURATION
Cast 1 day; Cost warding diagram ingredients worth a total
value of 2 gp × the spell level × the target’s level; Secondary
Casters 4
Primary Check Arcana (master) or Occultism (master); Secondary
Checks Crafting; Diplomacy or Intimidation; Arcana or
Occultism (whichever isn’t used for the primary check)
Range interplanar; Targets 1 extraplanar creature
Duration varies
You call forth an extraplanar creature of a level no greater than
double that of the planar binding ritual’s level and attempt to
bargain with it. The secondary caster attempting the Crafting
check creates a warding diagram to prevent the extraplanar
creature from attacking or leaving during the bargain; if that
caster fails or critically fails, then instead of the usual effects
of a failure or critical failure of the secondary skill check, the
extraplanar creature can attack or leave instead of negotiate.
You can also leave out this step, removing the need for a
Crafting check, with the same result (if you’re summoning a
good outsider you trust, for example). The creature can also
attack or leave if you use any hostile action against it or if the
warding diagram breaks. Once the diagram is complete, you
and the secondary casters each take your places at specific
points at the diagram’s edge where power concentrates.
You conjure the extraplanar creature within your wards and
negotiate a deal with it, generally to perform a task for you in
exchange for payment. A creature that doesn’t wish to negotiate
at all can attempt a Will save to stay on its home plane. Most
good and neutral extraplanar creatures feel that they have
something better to do than cater to the whims of mortals
and require a significant gift, especially if your task poses
significant risks. Evil extraplanar creatures are more likely to
accept a bargain for a lower cost as long as it allows them to
wreak havoc on the Material Plane or inflict evil upon the world
[[insert art: planar binding]]
Core Rulebook
414
along the way. Monetary prices usually range from the cost of
a consumable item of the creature’s level for a short and simple
task to a permanent magic item of the creature’s level or more
to persuade the creature to fight alongside you. However, some
extraplanar creatures may want payments other than money,
such as permission to cast a geas on you to fulfill an unspecified
later favor or obtain ownership of your soul via an infernal
contract. If you can’t come to an agreement in a reasonable
length of time after you’ve made your case, the extraplanar
creature can return from whence it came at any time.
Critical Success You call the extraplanar creature and bind it
in the wards for up to a full day before it returns home,
potentially allowing you to negotiate a better deal by
threatening to leave it in the wards for the full day.
Success You call the extraplanar creature.
Failure You fail to call the extraplanar creature.
Critical Failure You call something dark and horrible, unbound
by your wards, and it immediately attempts to destroy you.
PLANT GROWTH RITUAL 4
UNCOMMON NECROMANCY PLANT POSITIVE
Cast 1 day; Secondary Casters 1
Primary Check Nature (expert); Secondary Checks Farming
Lore or Survival
Area 1/2-mile-radius circle centered on you
Duration 1 year
You cause the plants within the area to be healthier and more
fruitful. In addition to other benefits of healthy plants, this
increases the crop yield for farms, depending on your success.
If you cast it in the area of a blight, plant growth attempts to
counteract the blight instead of producing its usual effect.
Critical Success Double the crop yield in the area, or increase
the area to a 1-mile radius.
Success Increase the crop yield in the area by one-third.
Failure The ritual has no effect.
Critical Failure The flora in the area changes in an unanticipated
way, determined by the GM but generally as contradictory
to your true desires as possible (for instance, blighting
crops when you would prefer to enrich them).
PRIMAL CALL RITUAL 6
UNCOMMON ABJURATION CONJURATION
Cast 1 day; Cost faerie circle ingredients worth a total value
of 1 gp × the spell level × the target’s level; Secondary
Casters 4
Primary Check Nature (master); Secondary Checks Crafting,
Diplomacy, Survival
Range 100 miles; Targets 1 animal, beast, fey, fungus, or plant
Duration see text
This functions as planar ally except you craft a faerie circle and
call an animal, beast, fey, fungus, or plant from within 100 miles.
RESURRECT RITUAL 5
UNCOMMON HEALING NECROMANCY
Cast 1 day; Cost diamonds worth a total value of 75 gp × the
target’s level; Secondary Casters 2
Primary Check Religion (expert); Secondary Checks
Medicine, Society
Range 10 feet; Targets 1 dead creature of up to 10th level
You attempt to call forth the target’s soul and return it to
its body. This requires the target’s body to be present and
relatively intact. The target must have died within the past
year. If Pharasma has decided that the target’s time has come
or the target doesn’t wish to return, this ritual automatically
fails, but you discover this after the successful Religion check
and can end the ritual without paying the cost.
Critical Success You resurrect the target. They return to life
with full Hit Points and the same spells prepared and points
in their pools they had when they died, and still suffering
from any long-term debilitations of the old body. The target
meets an agent of their deity during the resurrection who
inspires them, granting them a +1 status bonus to attack
rolls, Perception, saving throws, and skill checks for 1
week. The target is also permanently changed in some
way by their time in the afterlife, such as gaining a slight
personality shift, a streak of white in the hair, or a strange
new birthmark.
Success As critical success, except the target returns to life
with 1 Hit Point and no spells prepared or points in any
pools, and still is affected by any long-term debilitations of
the old body. Instead of inspiring them, the character’s time
in the Boneyard has left them temporarily debilitated. The
target is clumsy 1, drained 1, and enfeebled 1 for 1 week;
these conditions can’t be removed or reduced by any means
until the week has passed.
Failure Your attempt is unsuccessful.
Critical Failure Something goes horribly wrong—an evil spirit
possesses the body, the body transforms into a special kind
of undead, or some worse fate befalls the target.
Heightened (6th) You can resurrect a target of up to 12th level,
and the base cost is 125 gp.
Heightened (7th) You can use resurrect even with only a
small portion of the body; the ritual creates a new body on a
success or critical success. The target must have died within
the past decade. The ritual requires four secondary casters,
each of whom must be at least half the target’s level. The
target can be up to 14th level, and the base cost is 200 gp.
Heightened (8th) As 7th level, but the target can be up to 16th
level and the base cost is 300 gp.
Heightened (9th) You can use resurrect even without the
body as long as you know the target’s name and have
touched a portion of its body at any time. The target must
have died within the past century, and it doesn’t gain the
negative conditions on a success. The ritual requires eight
secondary casters, each of whom must be at least half the
target’s level. The target can be up to 18th level, and the base
cost is 600 gp.
Heightened (10th) As 9th level, except it doesn’t matter how
long ago the target died. The ritual requires 16 secondary
casters, each of whom must be at least half the target’s level.
The target can be up to 20th level, and the ritual’s base cost
is 1,000 gp.
415
SPELLS 7
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Saga Lands
BROKEN
LANDS
EYE OF
Dread
SHINING
KINGDOMS
GOLDEN ROAD
MWANGI
EXPANSE
IMPOSSIBLE
LANDS
OLD CHELIAX
HIGH
SEAS
ABSALOM
Core Rulebook
416
Realm of the
Mammoth Lands Lands of the
Linnorm Kings
Irrisen
Sarkoris Scar Mendev Lake of Mists
and Veils
Numeria Brevoy
River Kingdoms
Kyonin Galt
Tanglebriar
Druma
Five Kings
Mountains
Andoran
Verduran
Forest
Taldor
Razmiran
Isle of
Terror
Ustalav
Hold of
Belkzen
Nirmathas
Oprak Molthune
Isger
Mindspin
Mountains
Nidal
Ravounel
Menador Mountains
Cheliax
Arcadian Ocean
Steaming Sea
Hermea
Eye of Abendego
Shackles
The Inner Sea
Isle of Kortos
Rahadoum
Osirion
Geb
Qadira
Katapesh
Jalmeray
Obari Ocean
Barrier Wall
Nex
Mana Wastes
Shattered
Ridge
Kibwe
Sodden lands
Bloodcove
Senghor
Fever Sea Vidrian Mzali
Nantambu
Usaro
Kodor Mountains
Varisia
New Thassilon
Lake
Encarthan
Thuvia
Mediogalti
Island
Dwarves ascended to the surface from the underground reaches of the
Darklands in their legendary Quest for Sky, elves returned from the neighboring
planet of Castrovel via a network of portals to reclaim their lands and traditions,
and gnomes from the mysterious First World sought shelter from a now-forgotten
terror. Survivors from other ancestries who had sheltered through the terror and
destruction of Earthfall emerged during the Age of Darkness
to reclaim their ancestral lands, from scrappy goblin tribes
with a knack for surviving despite all odds against them to
industrious halflings who emerged from the ruins to found
societies of their own.
But humanity made the most astounding recovery. Less than
2,000 years after the near-extinction from Earthfall, the Age of
Destiny saw the rise of many new human empires throughout
the world. Humanity built wondrous structures, and its schools
relearned magic that had been thought lost. Among these human
nations walked a man named Aroden—an immortal survivor of
the devastation of Earthfall. Aroden had long since cultivated
a following of loyal subjects who regarded him with awe, for
immortality was but one of the wonders he’d achieved. Greatest
among these was his discovery of a shard of potent magic known
today as the Starstone, a fragment from the stars that fell during
Earthfall, which had lodged at the bottom of the Inner Sea. Contact
with this alien artifact assailed Aroden with phantasmagoric visions,
subjected him to a series of deadly martial trials, and posed
exhausting moral quandaries that challenged his limits more than
any of the arduous experiences he had yet endured. He emerged from
this test a living god, and his first divine act was to raise the Starstone
and the mass of land on which it had lain from the bottom of the sea to
form the Isle of Kortos—also known as Starstone Isle—where he then
established the city of Absalom.
In the centuries to follow, Absalom grew into one of the largest
cities in the world, and Aroden’s legacy grew alongside it. As the
millennia passed, his attentions increasingly turned away from the
concerns of the Inner Sea’s inhabitants to otherworldly matters beyond
mortal ken, but prophecy spoke of a time when he would return to
Golarion and lead humanity triumphantly into an Age of Glory. As the
time of Aroden’s return drew near, entire nations undertook monumental
preparations to welcome him back to Golarion.
But instead, Aroden died, and with him the reliability of prophecy as well.
Golarion was wracked by storms, war, and supernatural devastation as
the god’s death marked the beginning of a new age—a time of uncertainty,
but also a time of opportunity. This is the Age of Lost Omens, an age in
need of heroes like never before.
Chapter 8:
The Age of Lost Omens
Ten thousand years ago, the world of Golarion came close to ending. Earthfall, as this
extinction-level event came to be known, saw the world pummeled by a shower of
falling stars that sank continents, hollowed out new seas, and destroyed civilizations. It
took centuries for the world to recover, and centuries more for society to rebuild, but
recover it did.
8
417
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix

Beyond the Inner Sea
The Inner Sea region consists of the continent of Avistan
and the northern portion of the continent of Garund,
but it is only one part of a much larger world. Garund
itself extends further south, and its southern reaches are
home to several unique ancestries and cultures. As one
travels east from the Inner Sea, the vast expanse of the
continent of Casmaron stretches beyond the horizon.
With the immense inland Castrovin Sea at its heart,
Casmaron is the largest of Golarion’s continents and
home to some of its oldest and most successful empires.
Farther east of Casmaron lies the continent of Tian Xia,
a region often called the Dragon Empires. The northern
section of Tian Xia connects to Golarion’s northernmost
continent, a frozen reach known as the Crown of the
World. This continent forms a bridge between Tian Xia
and Avistan over the north pole. South of Tian Xia lies
the mysterious continent of Sarusan, of which little is
known due to the powerful storms and vexing currents
that shroud its shores. Heading west from the Inner Sea
region, sailors encounter the shattered remnants of lost
Azlant, a ruined continent that hosted one of humanity’s
first empires until it was destroyed during Earthfall.
Sailing farther west from these ruins eventually leads
to the shores of Arcadia, a land with unusual magical
traditions and powerful nations of its own. And beneath
all of these lands, carved into the planet’s very crust, lie
the twisting tunnels of the tripartite underground realm
known collectively as the Darklands, which houses great
horrors and dangers but equally great opportunities for
triumph and treasure.
In addition, Golarion is but one of 11 worlds that
orbit its sun. To the vast majority of the planet’s
denizens, the other 11 worlds are little more than points
of light in the sky, but these worlds are not so distant as
one might expect. The planets of Akiton and Castrovel
are Golarion’s closest neighbors. Travelers from both
have visited and in some cases settled on Golarion,
most notably elves, who originally hail from Castrovel.
Even the farthest planet, remote Aucturn, has influenced
Golarion, with its alien inhabitants exerting a sinister
touch on the world that recently put the entire planet
in peril. The wise thus do not discount the dangers
and wonders that dwell on other planets of Golarion’s
solar system.
The Great Beyond
Countless planets lie beyond Golarion’s solar system, but
even these myriad worlds of the universe, known as the
Material Plane, are but a fragment compared to what
lies in the multiverse beyond. Other planes of existence
and strange dimensions wrap this reality in a series of
layered, nested spheres, known collectively as the Great
Beyond. This model of reality is as much a metaphor
for concepts that mortal minds have difficulty grasping
as a physical description, for within the Great Beyond,
anything is possible.
Crown of the World
Arcadia
Azlant
Garund
Avistan
Casmaron
Tian Xia
Sarusan
Core Rulebook
418
Inner Sphere
The core of the multiverse is the Inner Sphere. Here, the vast expanse of the Material
Plane and its countless worlds can be found. The Elemental Planes surround the
Material Plane like layered shells, with the Plane of Air on the inside, transitioning
to the Plane of Water, then to the Plane of Earth, and finally to the Plane of Fire,
in something of a reversal of order in which these elements most often appear on
habitable planets. The planes of Positive and Negative Energy are also within the
Inner Sphere, their opposing nodes of life and death, creation and destruction, light
and dark forming the start and the end of all existence.
Outer Sphere
The scope of reality within the Outer Sphere is difficult to grasp. Here the gods dwell
and the souls of the dead gather to be judged by the goddess of the dead, Pharasma, atop
the spire in the realm that is her Boneyard. Anything is possible in the Outer Sphere,
and its realms are as much manifestations of philosophies and belief as anything else.
From the towering mountain of Heaven to the endless gulfs of the demon-held Abyss,
be it the agonizing pit of Hell or the boundless wonders of Elysium, all of reality is
represented within the Outer Sphere. Over time this reality erodes away and is recycled
back into the raw material of life within the Positive Energy Plane.
other planes and Dimensions
Some planes exist in the same physical or metaphysical space as others, overlapping
these other planes like overlays of reality. They include the ghost world of the
Ethereal Plane, which overlays the Inner Sphere; the dizzying vastness of the Astral
Plane, which overlays almost all reality and fills the seemingly endless gulf between
the Inner Sphere and the Outer Sphere; and the fey-haunted First World and the
sinister Shadow Plane, which each overlay the Material Plane. Stranger reaches of
the Great Beyond exist as well; some, such as the Dreamlands, are visited often (if
accidentally), while others, such as the enigmatic Dimension of Time, are visited
rarely, if ever. In all cases these dimensions cannot be accessed by normal means, and
each has their own method of entry and exit.
The Inner Sea Region
Although infinite opportunities for adventure await on other continents, worlds, and
planes, the Inner Sea region is the focus of the Pathfinder campaign setting. With
dozens of nations, empires, frontiers, and wildlands, this region presents a huge range
of opportunities for heroism and villainy, exploration and adventure!
The following pages break down the Inner Sea region into 10 separate regions, each
with its own themes. Only a brief overview of each region is presented here—enough
to establish the setting and whet the imagination. If you’re interested in exploring
Golarion and the Inner Sea region more, see the Pathfinder World Guide, Pathfinder
Adventures, and Pathfinder Adventure Path volumes. Adventure paths present not only
in-depth material about the region, but also full-length campaigns whose adventures
bring a brand-new group of heroes all the way to the height of power!
The year in the Inner Sea region is 4719 Absalom Reckoning (ar). As the calendar
advances in the real world, time also progresses for Golarion. The Pathfinder Core
Rulebook was first published in the year 2019, with the Inner Sea region’s corresponding
year ending in the same two final digits. Golarion’s history is expansive, but two of the
most significant events to shape the world occurred in –5293 ar, when Earthfall nearly
brought an end to the world, and in 4606 ar, when Aroden, the god of humanity, died,
and prophecies the world over began to fail, beginning the Age of Lost Omens.
The map on page 416 depicts the Inner Sea region, further subdivided into the 10
subregions explored on the following pages. The borders of these regions are thematic
rather than political. For an in-depth exploration of the Inner Sea region and its dozens
of nations and wildlands, see the Pathfinder Lost Omens World Guide.
TIME
Like Earth, Golarion spins on
its axis once roughly every 24
hours. A week has 7 days and
a year has 52 weeks. To keep
the calendar synchronized
with the astronomical year, an
extra leap day is tacked on to
the second month of the year
every 4 years.
MONTHS AND DAYS
The names of the months of
the year are as follows in the
Inner Sea region:
Abadius ( January)
Calistril (February)
Pharast (March)
Gozran (April)
Desnus (May)
Sarenith ( June)
Erastus ( July)
Arodus (August)
Rova (September)
Lamashan (October)
Neth (November)
Kuthona (December)
The names of the days are as
follows:
Moonday (Monday)
Toilday (Tuesday)
Wealday (Wednesday)
Oathday (Thursday)
Fireday (Friday)
Starday (Saturday)
Sunday (Sunday)
THE AGE OF LOST OMENS
419
8
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
At the heart of the Inner Sea stands the Isle of Kortos,
raised from the waters thousands of years ago as
Aroden’s first deific act. This amazing feat marks the
dawn of the Age of Enthronement and the first year of
the Absalom Reckoning calendar. The city of Absalom
itself, the largest in the Inner Sea region, sprawls on the
southern shore of this isle, and at the city’s heart stands
the legendary Starstone Cathedral. Within the walls of
this structure, the Starstone ever waits to test its next
supplicants—the few mortals who pass this mystic test
become gods themselves. This has made Absalom an
oft-besieged metropolis, but in its nearly 5,000 years, it
has never once fallen.
Absalom, called by many the City at the Center of the
World, boasts a population of over 300,000, and its culture
is a true melting pot in both ancestry and belief. Even the
city’s architecture reflects this, as one might expect of a
settlement of its age. From the towering and majestic
temples of the Ascendant Court to the close-packed
shops and guildhalls of the Petal District and the sagging
shanties in the Puddles, Absalom’s neighborhoods never
fail to present a memorable skyline. Many world-reaching
organizations were born in Absalom, notably the
Pathfinder Society (page 436).
The Isle of Kortos, also known as Starstone Isle, has
a similarly diverse ecosystem. The verdant forests and
grasslands of the west provide many of the resources
Absalom needs, but to the east, the rugged stony desert
known as the Scrape, the dangerous Riven Hills, and
the newly formed necromantic wasteland known as the
Tyrant’s Grasp present far harsher climates. The Isle
of Erran, just north of Starstone Isle, hosts the secondlargest city in the area, Escadar. A rough seaport with
more than its share of shady dealings and dangerous
types, Escadar also hosts large shipyards and maintains
a strong navy that helps to keep the surrounding waters
of the Inner Sea safe. A number of smaller islands also
skirt the coast of the Isle of Kortos—some barren, some
serving as hideouts for criminals and outcasts.
Rising from the center of the Isle of Kortos are the
Kortos Mounts, a short but rugged range of tors that
have, over the years, been ruled by minotaurs, harpies,
dragons, and worse. A few treacherous passes allow
travel through the mountains, but with the northern
shore of the Isle of Kortos being dominated by the soggy
tangles of Dunmire, these northern reaches offer little to
draw anyone other than bandits and adventurers into
these still-untamed lands.
Absalom and Starstone Isle
Core Rulebook
420
Far to the north of Absalom sprawl the Broken Lands,
nations and wildernesses united in their shared stature
as fractured regions—places where life itself has taken
a blow and the struggle to survive is simply part of
daily reality. Not all of the Broken Lands are constantly
fraught with peril, but regardless of where one might
settle down in these parts’ tumultuous times, danger is
rarely far from home.
In some cases, the breaks are political. In the northeast,
the nation of Brevoy has hung on the edge of civil war
for many years, as the long-running feud between the
traditional noble houses of Issia and the mercenary
swordlords of Rostland maintain an ongoing state of
tension that may be nearing a breaking point. But in the
case of the oft-contested River Kingdoms, these political
breaks have reached something of a draw, for here it is
said that anyone might become the ruler of a nation—if
they have the tenacity to seize the reins of rule.
Elsewhere in the Broken Lands, the fractures are more
spiritual. Razmiran, for example, is ruled by the living
god Razmir, who demands the worship of all who dwell
within his nation’s borders and brooks no competition
of faith. His priests act as police throughout the land,
brutally enforcing their deity’s laws. To the north in
Mendev, these spiritual breaks are less obvious; this
land struggles to reclaim its heritage in the wake of a
century of occupation by a crusading force that, until a
few years ago, stood as a bulwark against the demons
who ruled the lands across the river to the west.
These western lands are truly broken, in a physical
sense, for in the chaotic times at the dawn of the Age
of Lost Omens, powerful agents of the demon lord
Deskari tore a hole in reality. The resulting wound in the
landscape allowed legions of demons to pour through
and devastate the lands once known as Sarkoris.
Although heroes of the Fifth Crusade recently defeated
Deskari and closed the rift, these lands are still known
as the Worldwound. The main threat has been quelled,
but demons still inhabit the region, and the blighted
landscape struggles to return to normal.
Perhaps the strangest of the Broken Lands lie near
its heart. The rugged hills and plains of Numeria are
home to many Kellid clans. However, in the distant
past, the crash of a scientifically advanced starship
brought strange aliens, mechanical monstrosities, and
technological wonders to Golarion, but its fiery arrival
left large reaches of the surrounding land blighted and
blasted even to this day.
Broken Lands
THE AGE OF LOST OMENS
421
8
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
The heart of the continent of Avistan has rotted.
This region is dominated by Lake Encarthan, a large
inland sea that was—until recently—a well-traveled hub
for trade. To the southwest stands the militaristic nation
of Molthune, which had long engaged in an intermittent
war against its northern neighbor, Nirmathas, a wooded
nation populated by folk who take their freedom
seriously. An uprising of hobgoblins took advantage of
this conflict, and while hostilities have since abated, the
two nations now share their borders with a third: the
newborn hobgoblin nation Oprak.
North of these war-torn nations lie two other lands
equally forged in the crucible of conflict. Until recently,
the paladins and protectors of the small but strong
nation of Lastwall stood fast against invasions from
orcs, undead, and the like. The wild and rugged Hold of
Belkzen, meanwhile, has long been held by those orcs,
ever since they were driven up from the Darklands below
by the dwarves during their Quest for Sky thousands of
years ago.
Still farther to the north is the nation of Ustalav,
a collection of counties each beset with its own
manifestation of horror and fear, ranging from the
nightmarishly cosmic to the dreadfully infernal.
It was from Ustalav that one of the greatest threats to the
Inner Sea region emerged. The ancient lich Tar-Baphon—
known as the Whispering Tyrant—has been defeated
twice in the distant past—once by Aroden and once by
the heroes of the Shining Crusade, but he has never been
truly destroyed. When the magical seals that kept him
imprisoned below the ominous tower of Gallowspire
were finally sundered in 4719 ar, Tar-Baphon emerged,
bringing with him devastation on such a scale that
the one-time nation of Lastwall, which bore the brunt
of his return to the world, has been utterly scoured. It
exists now only as the Gravelands—the nation that once
stood watch over undead uprisings now consigned to an
undeath of its own. While heroes temporarily thwarted
the Whispering Tyrant’s immediate plans shortly after he
emerged, the lich remains an active menace.
The Whispering Tyrant now rules a kingdom of the
undead on the aptly named Isle of Terror in the center
of Lake Encarthan. The nations lining Lake Encarthan’s
shores have all suffered to varying degrees under the
Whispering Tyrant’s renewed influence, and some are
pursuing unlikely alliances to resist him. The lich is
gathering his resources on the Isle of Terror, and none
can say where or when he will strike next.
Eye of Dread
Core Rulebook
422
Trade and travel rule the pathways of the so-called
Golden Road, known for its shining sands and economic
strength. Much of this region consists of sprawling desert
wilderness, but this does not mean that the Golden
Road is sparse in population. Coastlines and rivers
serve as the lifeblood of this region, and some caravans
brave the heat and dangers of the desert to trade across
northern Garund. Some of the oldest nations in the
Inner Sea region command this region, and ancient lore
and valuable treasures can be found amid the shifting
sands and storied cities.
The largest of these cities is the cosmopolitan
Katapesh, where mercantilism is overseen by a strange
group known as the Pactmasters. Much of the trade
in Katapesh is in goods that can be freely exported or
imported from throughout the Inner Sea region, but
the city does just as much business in avenues normally
regulated to the black markets of other societies.
Qadira’s cities may not be as individually large as
Katapesh, but the nation’s economy is perhaps the
strongest. It’s certainly the oldest in the region, with
support from the long-established Padishah Empire of
Kelesh to the east. This, coupled with the church of
Sarenrae—perhaps the nation’s most successful cultural
export to the rest of the Inner Sea region—has secured
Qadira’s status as one of the most important centers of
influence on the Golden Road.
To the west, the five city-states of Thuvia control
a legendary artifact called the sun orchid elixir, which
grants near-immortality to those who consume it. This
treasured commodity is the keystone of Thuvia’s place in
the Golden Road. Further west, the nation of Rahadoum
is perhaps the weakest mercantile link, but the fact that
this society has eschewed the worship of gods to place
its faith in the industry and talent of mortals alone gives
the nation its own compelling draw.
At the center of the Golden Road lies mighty Osirion,
one of the oldest nations of the Inner Sea region. While
Osirion was for a time ruled by Qadira, the legacies and
monuments of its early days still stand tall and are an
indisputable and iconic source of pride and identity to its
people. The influence of Osirion’s artisans, philosophers,
and spellcasters has spread far and wide, particularly via
the Esoteric Order of the Palatine Eye, far to the north in
Ustalav, and the faith of Nethys, whose not-so-humble
beginnings as a mortal wizard can be traced to the very
beginning of Osirion’s history during the ancient Age
of Destiny.
Golden Road
THE AGE OF LOST OMENS
423
8
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
From fleets of pirates united under the Hurricane
Queen of the Shackles to an ancient, subaquatic empire
of shapechanging monsters led by the sinister veiled
masters, the High Seas of Golarion present dangers
both above and below the waves. Yet they also serve as
important trade routes, with merchant ships traveling
the waters to link powerful nations at opposite ends of
continents. Sea captains brave the dangers of the High
Seas hoping to partake in the fortunes to be made in
trade, linking the ports of the Inner Sea itself to those
on the shores of the Arcadian Ocean from the Mwangi
Expanse to the Saga Lands.
Piracy is one of the greatest dangers facing travel on
the High Seas. The immense volcanic archipelago known
as the Shackles serves as a haven for these pirates, with
their Hurricane Queen providing just enough structure
to keep them from going at each other’s throats. A great
diversity of monsters and threats populate these islands,
and the local pirates know which are safe and which to
avoid. North of the Shackles lies Mediogalti Island. While
its only significant port, Ilizmagorti, is a known safe
harbor for pirates, it is the presence of the infamous Red
Mantis assassins who rule the isle that gives this region
its greatest infamy.
Other ports present their own complications. The
port-city of Promise on the remote isle of Hermea a few
hundred miles west of Avistan rewards well those who
can negotiate the privilege of trade, but such honors are
hard won, for the dragon who rules this closed society
does not allow just anyone to visit. Rumors of what goes
on beyond Promise’s dock district range from tales of a
perfect society to those of an oppressive government that
affords no free will. Farther to the north, the elves of the
Mordant Spire are even more closed to visitors, and for
most sailors, the only thing the Mordant Spire offers is
an unmistakable landmark for navigation, as the twisting
spire can be seen for miles.
Of all the regions along the Avistani and Garundi
coastlines, though, none are more hazardous to travel
than the waters tortured by the Eye of Abendego. This
immense hurricane first formed at the onset of the Age
of Lost Omens, when storms wracked all of Golarion in
the wake of Aroden’s death. Unlike those other storms,
though, this hurricane remained. Its winds and storm
surge have destroyed several nations and transformed a
previously key gulf into a navigational nightmare. What
strange force caused and perpetuates the Eye of Abendego
has, to date, eluded all investigation.
High Seas
Core Rulebook
424
Magic allows for astounding feats, yet even those
who consider themselves experts in the magical arts
pause in wonder before the spectacles to be found in
the Impossible Lands. What is taken for granted in
these strange and eclectic nations would be all but
impossible elsewhere.
Take Geb as an example. Here, the living are the
minority, and undeath is the predominant way of life.
Cruelty, sadism, and violence are the norm in Geb, as
one might expect of a land ruled by a violent, undead
dictator. This ghost, for whom the country was named,
has ruled his nation for thousands of years, although
for the past several centuries the day-to-day rule of the
land fell to his queen, Arazni. Her recent disappearance
(many would instead say “escape”) and abandonment
of her duties have invigorated the ghost sovereign to
once again take active leadership of his benighted realm.
Geb has opposed its northern neighbor, Nex, for the
entirety of its existence. Also named after its ruler, Nex
is a cosmopolitan realm where magic is mundane. Nex
himself has been missing for ages, yet in his absence
the Arclords have ruled quite effectively. Here, golems
patrol the streets, and the practice of fleshwarping is an
accepted and legitimate industry.
Between these two opposed nations lies a stretch of
land known as the Mana Wastes, a blasted and blighted
badland formed by the ancient wars between Nex and
Geb. The very magic of these lands is damaged—or in
many reaches dead entirely—and peculiar mutants flop
and prowl through the ruins in search of prey.
Only in the duchy of Alkenstar does life approach
anything approximating normal, but even here the
assumptions of the rest of the world are turned on
their head. With magic being unpredictable, Alkenstar’s
citizens have turned instead to technology. The nation
is home to metallurgists and machinists, and the art of
gunsmithing gives them an excellent advantage in this
part of the world. Exports of firearms have steadily
increased over the years, and Alkenstar is emerging as a
significant power of its own as a result.
Across the waters of the Obari Ocean lies the final realm
of the Impossible Lands: the island nation of Jalmeray.
Here it isn’t magic alone that allows for impossibilities
but also focused self-control and perfection of the spirit.
The people of Jalmeray have accomplished astounding
physical feats and achieved remarkable intellectual
insights using nothing more than ancient traditions of
mysticism and self-perfection.
Impossible Lands
THE AGE OF LOST OMENS
425
8
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
The Mwangi Expanse is home to a wide array of
civilizations, both past and present, even as it holds the
largest stretch of wilderness in the Inner Sea region. In
fact, one of the first civilizations to rise from the ashes
after Earthfall rose here in this land—the nation of Shory
and its astounding flying cities, from which many modern
customs of magic stem.
Some Mwangi cities and kingdoms were lost far more
recently than those ancient wonders. When the Eye of
Abendego formed just over a century ago, its winds and
waves flooded two significant realms along Garund’s
west coast. Where once stood the nations of Lirgen and
Yamasa now stretch only the Sodden Lands, a swath
of swampland and salt marshes held by rival gangs of
scavengers and monsters. Even more recently, a powerful
city-state in the heart of the Mwangi Jungle, Usaro, fell
when its brutal leader, Ruthazek the Gorilla King, was
slain by adventurers. Usaro has been without a leader for
only a few short years, but already its violent inhabitants
have caused significant damage in their anarchic rioting.
A long lineage of demonically infused Gorilla Kings has
ruled Usaro over the centuries, and so a new one will
likely soon rise to seize control of Usaro, for the moment
this sinister region lacks a head to focus its wrath.
Despite these instances of ruin and destruction, the
Mwangi Expanse hosts a wealth of diverse and powerful
city-states within its reaches. In Bloodcove, the ruthless
mercantile league of the Aspis Consortium rules. Farther
south along the coast stands Senghor, whose stance
against both piracy and slavery place the city in stark
contrast to its northern neighbor. The city-state of
Nantambu lies far upstream from Bloodcove on the Vanji
River, where its citizens carry on the ancient traditions
of Old-Mage Jatembe in combining arcane and primal
magic. Far to the southeast stands Mzali, which lies
under the oppressive rule of the undead child-king
Walkena, though a group of dissidents called the Bright
Lions works to build resistance to the mummy’s reign.
Then there is the city of Kibwe, where within its walls
dwell an eclectic mix of people who have journeyed
from afar to seek trade and companionship.
Farther south from these independent city-states lies the
recently freed nation of Vidrian. Originally established as
the Chelish colony of Sargava, Vidrian has now seized its
own destiny and cast off its colonial shackles. In so doing,
the young nation has exposed itself to the predations
of pirates and worse, yet to its citizens, freedom from
oppression is well worth that price.
Mwangi Expanse
Core Rulebook
426
Wars several decades ago, House Thrune did little to
provide  aid. As the repercussions of the Whispering
Tyrant’s return to power send ripples of nervous dread
through the land, Isger’s people grow fearful that they
lack not only their own political strength but also that of
their supposed protector, and as a result, Isger is one of
the lands in the Inner Sea region most in need of heroes.
Recently, several uprisings within Cheliax have further
tested the nation’s resolve. After a devastating nautical
loss in the Shackles resulted in Vidrian’s independence, a
new Iomedaean rebellion called the Glorious Reclamation
threatened Cheliax from within. House Thrune and the
Asmodean church defeated the Glorious Reclamation, but
at a price—a simultaneous rebellion was successful, with
a group of rebels called the Silver Ravens negotiating the
successful secession of the new nation of Ravounel.
North of Cheliax, the shadowy nation of Nidal remains
the diabolic nation’s only real ally. A theocracy ruled by
the church of Zon-Kuthon, Nidal is the oldest nation on
Avistan, for its people turned to the Midnight Lord for
protection during the Age of Darkness after Earthfall.
Today, pain and dread are comforts to the citizens of
Nidal, and millennia of rule under a church that revels in
pain have left them inured to agony and welcoming of loss.
At its height, the empire of Cheliax had holdings that
reached from Varisia to Garund and east all the way to
Galt. Aroden was prophesized to return to the world
of mortals to usher in a new Age of Glory, and those
prophecies predicted the Chelish city of Westcrown
would be the point of his arrival. Instead, his death
ignited a civil war that lasted for decades. When the
Thrice-Damned House of Thrune emerged as victor,
Cheliax had forever changed. Under House Thrune’s
rule, Cheliax transformed into a nation that viewed Hell
as a blueprint for government. The church of Asmodeus
became Cheliax’s official state religion, and diabolism
its most powerful philosophy. The devil had come home
to rule, and while the nation’s politicians and leaders
claimed that they maintained control of their fate—and
House Thrune had merely formed an alliance with Hell to
maintain its power and keep order—the nation’s internal
and external enemies know better.
Many of Cheliax’s outlying provinces—such as
Andoran, Galt, and Vidrian—revolted and became their
own nations. The nation of Isger remains, at least on paper,
a thrall. Cheliax values Isger for its important position as
a trade route to the Lake Encarthan region, but when
Isger was wracked by the violence of the Goblinblood
Old Cheliax
THE AGE OF LOST OMENS
427
8
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
While the opportunity for epic adventure exists throughout
the world, in recent years it seems the Saga Lands have
produced the most notorious and legendary tales. These
sprawling northern reaches feature kingdoms ruled by
vikings and witches, realms home to mammoth-riding
Kellid clans, and a frontier land of free cities and
dangerous wilderness—all of which are steeped in the
ancient legacy of the long-gone empire of Thassilon.
Millennia ago, the nation of Thassilon was ruled by
the sinful, tyrannical runelords. These wizards carved
out legends intended to last for an eternity, but even
the mighty runelords succumbed to the devastation
of Earthfall. The seven reigning runelords of that time
retreated into the safety of extradimensional domains,
and for eons they slumbered, until they began to wake
in 4707 ar.
The frontier realm of Varisia, once the heart of
Thassilon, bore the brunt of the wrath of the first
wakened runelord, an avaricious sadist named Karzoug.
A band of unlikely heroes emerged from the small
coastal town of Sandpoint to eventually face and
defeat Karzoug, yet his wakening soon roused other
slumbering runelords, and a new band of heroes was
forced to defeat the risen tyrants.
While the neighboring Lands of the Linnorm Kings,
Realms of the Mammoth Lords, and witch-haunted
Irrisen never faced direct repercussions from the
runelords, these northern lands hold dangers of their
own. A long-running cold war between the vikings
of the Linnorm Kingdoms and the winter witches of
Irrisen to the east finally came to a sputtering end when
a daughter of the immortal witch Baba Yaga attempted
to defy her mother and usurp Irrisen’s traditions of
rule. While the eternal winter of Irrisen set in place by
Baba Yaga endures, its new ruler, Anastasia, may prove
to be the first benevolent presence to sit on the throne
in centuries. Farther to the east, the Kellid clans of the
Realm of the Mammoth Lords played their own pivotal
roles in defying the demons of the Worldwound.
Recently, a new nation has risen in the Saga Lands.
After the runelords were defeated, two surviving
runelords decided to adjust their traditions to fit this
strange new world they found themselves in. Now the
fledgling nation of New Thassilon sprawls along the
northern border of Varisia, and it remains to be seen if
its rulers will fully adopt a more peaceful path, or if it is
but a matter of time before the old traditions of sin and
violence rise once again.
Saga Lands
Core Rulebook
428
The empire of Taldor was historically the heart of the
Shining Kingdoms. In the early Age of Enthronement,
Taldor sent several Armies of Exploration to expand
the nation’s borders and colonize the surrounding lands.
Today, Taldor is but a shadow of its former glory, but after
a recent bout of internal strife, a progressive new empress
has claimed the crown, and Taldor may be on the path to
recover its old glory for the first time in centuries.
To the west, the democratic nation of Andoran stands
as a rising star on the international stage. Ever since the
province seceded from the nation of Cheliax, Andoran’s
military has helped to stem the flow of slavery, and its
heroes have stood tall against all manner of peril to the
common folk. But the future doesn’t look entirely bright
for Andoran, for with Cheliax’s recent upsets, rumors
flow that House Thrune may seek to reclaim control
of its wayward thrall. Given the looming threat of the
Whispering Tyrant, an all-out war between these two
powerful nations could be disastrous.
Northeast of Andoran sprawls the dwarven city-states
of the Five Kings Mountains. No strangers to war, both
against enemies and among themselves, the dwarves of the
Five Kings remain allies of Andoran but have their own
troubles that command most of their attention. To the
west of the dwarven realm, the rich and powerful nation
of Druma controls nearly half of the lake’s southern
shoreline and uses its position to bolster its coffers and
further the teachings of the Prophecies of Kalistrade,
a philosophy that teaches that wealth can be achieved
through adherence to strict and abstemious practices.
Northeast of Druma lie the forested elven lands
of Kyonin, one of Avistan’s oldest nations. This land
belonged to the elves long before Earthfall, but for
thousands of years after that devastation, they left their
realm abandoned. In that time, a powerful demon named
Treerazer seized control of the forest’s southern reaches,
corrupting the terrain into a swampy, desolate mire called
Tanglebriar. Although the elves have returned, they’ve
been unable to force Treerazer from their southern border.
Still farther east is the nation of Galt. Wracked for
decades by a self-perpetuating series of rebellions and
revolutions, this land has been torn apart from within
over and over. Its people are tired and desperate as they
continue to live what lives they can in the shadow of the
final blades—powerful magical guillotines that claim the
souls of those they decapitate. If any of the regions of the
Shining Kingdoms is poised for significant change in the
near future, it is surely revolution-wracked Galt.
Shining Kingdoms
THE AGE OF LOST OMENS
429
8
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Human Ethnicities
A variety of ethnic groups make up the human populace of the continents bordering
Golarion’s Inner Sea. Many of these groups have origins on distant lands, but the Inner
Sea region has a diverse population drawn from across the globe. Human characters can
be from any of these ethnicities, regardless of what land they call home.
Characters from these ethnicities speak Common if they come from the Inner Sea
region, and some ethnicities give access to a regional language or another uncommon
language (page 65). Half-elves and half-orcs arise across all human ethnicities and bear
the features of both those ethnicities and their non-human parents.
Garundi
Garundi span the nations of northern Garund along the shores of the Inner Sea,
and their clans are known for strength and empathy, treating their neighbors with
compassion and respect. Their skin tones often range from dark brown to beige, and
they often have tall statures, broad shoulders, and high cheekbones. Garundi have
access to the Osiriani language.
Keleshite
Tracing their origins to the Keleshite Empire in the eastern deserts, Keleshites often
have black hair, brown eyes, and dark- to cool-brown skin. Their culture takes pride
in the empire’s legacy, valuing boldness, wit, and luxury. Fashions tend to incorporate
flowing fabrics, headdresses, and turbans. Keleshites have access to the Kelish language.
Kellid
In the mountains and steppes of northern Avistan, Kellids live hard lives to survive the
threats of the wild, wary of magic and relying on skill and might when hunting and
fighting. They are typically a brawny and dark-haired people, tanned and bearing eyes
that are often black, blue, or gray. Kellids have access to the Hallit language.
Mwangi
Spread across the vast continent of Garund, from the parched deserts in the north
to the dense jungles of the Mwangi Expanse, the Mwangi people are divided into
four diverse subgroups: Bekyar, Bonuwat, Mauxi, and Zenj. Mwangi skin tones
range from black to dark-brown to ocher, and they have black or dark-brown hair.
Mwangi have access to the Mwangi language.
Nidalese
Nidalese hail from a culture that escaped destruction during the Earthfall, when a
swarm of meteoroids carved out the Inner Sea. The ancient Nidalese pledged fealty to
an evil shadow god to obtain salvation, and the grip of Zon-Kuthon has tainted these
people ever since. Nidalese tend toward gray, ashy skin tones, with white, gray, or
black hair. Nidalese have access to the Shadowtongue language.
Shoanti
The Shoanti clans called quahs were long ago pushed out of lush territory in the nation
of Varisia into the harsh badlands of the Storval Plateau. Stalwart and tenacious, they
remain oath-sworn to someday retake what they’ve lost. Their skin tones typically
range from sepia to russet, and quah members are easily identified by their shaved
heads and traditional tattoos. Shoanti have access to the Shoanti language.
Cultures
Of course, there’s more to the world of Golarion than its geopolitical borders and wilderness
regions. It’s the people who dwell in those nations and the creatures that lurk in those wilds
who bring the world to life.
GARUNDI
MWANGI
NIDALESE
KELESHITE
KELLID
Core Rulebook
430
Taldan
Renowned as artisans, scholars, and soldiers, Taldans have spread throughout Avistan,
as the empire of Taldor once spanned almost half of the northern continent. Taldans
often have brown hair, pale-white to deep-bronze skin, and green, gray, or amber eyes.
Their native language, Taldane, is so widespread that it is also called Common.
Tian
Few in number in the Inner Sea region, Tians originally come from myriad nations
in Tian Xia, a continent on the opposite side of the world. They typically have dark
hair, but their body types, skin tones, and eye colors vary greatly, as “Tian” is in fact
a general term describing several ethnicities. Tians have access to the Tien language.
Ulfen
The coastal raiders of the Ulfen clans are skilled sailors and bodyguards. They’re
often tall, with pale to ruddy skin and blond, light-brown, or red hair. They typically
show pride in their appearances by adorning themselves with furs, horn, and ivory.
Ulfen have access to the Skald language.
Varisian
Varisians historically favored a nomadic life of roving caravans, but today many lead
a settled lifestyle in places like Ustalav and their namesake land. Their skin tones
typically range from tawny beige to khaki. They have a wide variety of hair colors
from platinum to red to brown, and their large, expressive eyes range into even rarer
colors like violet and gold. Varisians have access to the Varisian language.
Vudrani
Though the empire of Vudra is far to the east, it has a foothold in the Inner Sea on
the island of Jalmeray. A widespread belief in reincarnation makes dedication to
self-improvement a hallmark of Vudrani culture. Vudrani typically have dark eyes
and skin tones that run from umber to tawny. Their hair is often black and ranges
in thickness and texture. Piercings, jewelry, and makeup are common adornments
among Vudrani. Vudrani have access to the Vudrani language.
Dwarves
For untold eons, the dwarven people dwelled in the lightless reaches of the Darklands.
It wasn’t until after Earthfall that the dwarves undertook the legendary Quest for
Sky, during which the majority of dwarves made a pilgrimage to relocate to the
surface of Golarion. In doing so, they not only drove the orcs to the surface before
them, but also established several immense Sky Citadels at each location where
they emerged from the realm below. Today, three major ethnicities of dwarves exist,
each associated with one of three altitude bands: the grondaksen dwarves (who
still dwell in the upper reaches of the Darklands), the ergaksen dwarves (the most
widespread heritage, and those who dwell on or adjacent to the surface world), and
the holtaksen dwarves (the least populous—dwarves who dwell only among the
highest mountain reaches).
Elves
Golarion is not the original elven home world, but those elves who dwell here
today are considered native to the planet. These people first came to Golarion from
the neighboring planet of Castrovel via a network of portals known as aiudara.
While elves abandoned Golarion for several thousand years after the devastation of
Earthfall, they have since returned in force. The most populous elves are the aiudeen,
elves who have acclimated to temperate forest lands. These are the elves who rule
the nation of Kyonin and are most often encountered in other societies. To the south,
the mualijae elves have acclimated to the sweltering jungles of the Mwangi Expanse,
while far to the north the ilverani elves (known to some as the snowcasters) dwell
SHOANTI
VARISIAN
VUDRANI
TALDAN
TIAN
ULFEN
THE AGE OF LOST OMENS
431
8
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
in the frozen reaches of Irrisen and beyond in the Crown of the World. The vourinoi
elves of Garund’s deserts are the most secretive of the elven ethnicities.
Gnomes
The first gnomes arrived on Golarion at some point after Earthfall from the
otherworldly dimension known as the First World, fleeing a terror whose nature
few can recall. Since that time, gnomes have transitioned fully to creatures of the
Material Plane, although they all live in fear of the life-threatening condition known
as bleaching. Feychild gnomes are the most widespread. Glimmer gnomes retain a
stronger tie to the First World, while others known as fell gnomes have embraced
the darker traditions of their fey heritage. Keenspark gnomes (jokingly referred to
as “sour gnomes”) seek to avoid the bleaching by exploring new innovations rather
than seeking new experiences or exploring the world.
Goblins
Although many adventurers might assume a goblin is a goblin, these scrappy and
creative people are as diverse as any other ancestry. The most widespread are the rasp
goblins, so named for the large numbers who have traditionally dwelled along the
rugged coastlines of Varisia’s west coast, a region known as the Rasp. Forest goblins
tend to be smaller than the other ethnicities and are located mostly in central Avistan.
Their numbers are only now beginning to recover from the horrors of the Goblinblood
Wars. The frost goblins of Irrisen’s eternal winter are unusual among their kind for their
propensity to grow blue fur on their bodies, while the monkey goblins of Mediogalti
Island are known for their prehensile tails and arboreal habitats.
Halflings
Many halflings have lived in the shadow of other societies for as long as they can
remember, living in much the same way as their neighboring cultures and adding
their own unique variations over time or as necessity demands. However, numerous
distinct halfling cultures exist outside of the context of other peoples and nations.
In some cases, these divisions were fueled by separation and circumstances, such as
the oppressed halflings of Cheliax who have been forced into slavery, and the Song’o
halflings of the Mwangi Expanse, who hid from all other cultures to avoid a similar
fate. Other halflings, such as the jaric, mihrini, othoban, and uhlam halflings, simply
formed their own traditions without the influence of humans and other creatures.
Regional Languages
These languages are uncommon outside the region of their genesis. A character hailing
from one of the regions listed below automatically has access to that language. In the
Inner Sea region, the language referred to as Common elsewhere in the rules is the same
as Taldane—a result of Taldor’s legacy of control and influence over the whole region.
Nearly every language listed here is spoken on the melting-pot streets of Absalom.
TABLE 8–1: REGIONAL LANGUAGES
Language Regions
Hallit Irrisen, Mendev, Numeria, Realm of the Mammoth Lords, Sarkoris, Ustalav
Kelish Katapesh, Kelesh, Osirion, Qadira
Mwangi Mwangi Expanse, the Shackles, Thuvia, Vidrian
Osiriani Geb, Katapesh, Mana Wastes, Nex, Osirion, Rahadoum, Thuvia
Shoanti Hold of Belkzen, Varisia
Skald Irrisen, Lands of the Linnorm Kings
Tien Lands of the Linnorm Kings, Realm of the Mammoth Lords, Tian Xia
Varisian Brevoy, the Gravelands, Nidal, Nirmathas, Ustalav, Varisia
Vudrani Jalmeray, Katapesh, Nex, Vudra
DWARF
ELF
GNOME
HALFLING
Core Rulebook
432
GOBLIN
HALF-ELF
HALF-ORC
Listed on these pages are brief descriptions of many
creatures that have held important cultural, regional,
or historical roles on Golarion, particularly in the Inner
Sea region.
Alghollthus
Perhaps the oldest intelligent creatures on Golarion,
the alghollthus ruled vast empires in the depths of the
world’s oceans for eons before the first humans came
to be. In fact, according to some of their wall carvings,
they created the first human beings. Whether or not this
claim is true is impossible to prove, but these creatures—
from the sinister aboleths to their shape-changing
rulers, the veiled masters—have certainly been a part of
the world for a long, long time. Moreover, their claim
to have existed on Golarion before the gods themselves
turned their divine eyes upon the world carries some
disturbing implications.
Demons
Normally bound to the Abyss, demons can be
found wherever cults or evil spellcasters exist
to call them to this world. Two notable locations,
the Worldwound in the north and the Tanglebriar in
southern Kyonin, deserve special mention, for here the
demons of the Abyss have established lasting presences.
Devils
Although the rulers of Cheliax maintain that Hell is but a
blueprint and devilkind is just a tool the clever spellcasters
of House Thrune use to maintain control over their
nation (as well as their decadent lifestyle), devils have
an insidious hold over that nation. With the state
formally devoted to Asmodeus and powerful orders
of Hellknights serving as mercenary arbiters of law, it
should come as no surprise that devils are unusually
common in Cheliax and the neighboring realms.
Dragons
Dragons are rightfully counted among the
most legendary of monsters in the Inner Sea
region. Most prefer to dwell in remote lairs,
swooping down to interact with humanity
only when their violent tempers push them
to raid. Good dragons may seem less common
than their evil kin, but only because they have less of an
urge to mingle with humanoids.
Genies
The nation of Qadira has a long history with genies,
but geniekind’s involvement with the Inner Sea region
is certainly not limited to that nation. They serve as
architects and creators of impossibilities on the isle of
Jalmeray, and in Katapesh they are rumored to be infused
into the very stone and soil of the land.
Giants
Countless tribes and varieties of these
massive humanoids rule the rugged
reaches of the world, from volcanic
mountain ranges and stinking
marshlands to trackless badlands
Creatures
The six humanoid ancestries are far from Golarion’s only inhabitants. Many other
creatures dwell in the world, some kindly and others cruel, some wild and others
organized, some anthropomorphic and others completely monstrous. Even creatures
that are usually foes of civilization, and whom brave adventurers face in battle, can
sometimes be reasoned with or even befriended. Not all of them are evil, and some are
actively helpful to their neighbors. And some, of course, simply want to be left alone.
THE AGE OF LOST OMENS
433
8
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
and steaming jungles. They were used as slaves in ancient
Thassilon, where they were ruled by magic-infused rune
giants and forced to erect enormous monuments that
remain to this day in Varisia, Belkzen, and the Lands of
the Linnorm Kings. But now the giant tribes of northern
Avistan are scattered across the land, largely unaware
they once had a society that was destroyed and reshaped
by the ancient empire of Thassilon.
Gnolls
Hyena-headed gnolls, ever seeking new slaves to perform
menial labor, make for unreliable mercenaries but excel at
hunting intelligent prey. Gnolls dwell primarily in northern
Garund and are particularly common in Osirion, Katapesh,
and Nex. Indeed, gnolls can be found operating openly as
bodyguards, mercenaries, and slavers in cities like Katapesh.
Goblinoids
Goblins are certainly the most widespread and recognized
goblinoids, but their taller, more militaristic hobgoblin
kin rule the new kingdom of Oprak near Lake Encarthan.
The looming, murderous creatures known as bugbears
remain loners who eschew social structures, preferring to
pursue their sadistic hobbies on their own.
Kobolds
Industrious and fecund, kobolds thrive anywhere they
can, often dwelling in narrow confines and twisting
burrows in the hinterlands of rural regions or spreading
throughout the sewers of urban centers. These small,
reptilian humanoids share many traits with dragons—
but courage, might, and an intimidating presence are
certainly not among them!
Leshys
The first leshys were grown by druids as minions, but over
time these strange, plantlike creatures have diversified
and now take many forms. Leshys have yet to organize or
form nations of their own, but considering how quickly
their numbers have grown and how swiftly they adapt to
new regions, a leshy nation seems all but guaranteed in
the near future.
Lizardfolk
Once widespread in Avistan and Garund, the isolationist
lizardfolk, also known as iruxis, have been forced farther
and farther into their forests and swamps by climate
change and the rapid expansion of other humanoids.
Normally peaceful, lizardfolk can be driven to war by
encroaching civilization and power-hungry lizardfolk
leaders—the latter are disturbingly common in the
Mwangi Expanse and the River Kingdoms.
Orcs
Most orcs currently regard the Hold of Belkzen as their
ancestral land, despite the fact that they once called the
upper reaches of the Darklands home. After living in a
violent and brutal culture built on conquest and strength,
some orcs of the Hold of Belkzen have begun to consider
other means of securing
their lands.
Planar Scions
A wide variety of planar scions
dwell in the Inner Sea region, including
the descendants of celestials and fiends who
have mixed their bloodlines with those of mortals,
and other lineages that arose from the influence of the
Elemental Planes. In Cheliax, those who exhibit diabolic
influences are particularly despised, as the leaders of that
nation see them as examples of mortals who succumbed
to fiendish influence instead of commanding devils as
minions and slaves.
Serpentfolk
Serpentfolk once ruled the second layer of the Darklands
along with much of the surface of Garund and Avistan.
Azlant’s expansion into the Inner Sea region long before
Earthfall led to a terrible war between the two peoples.
When Azlant proved the victor, the surviving serpentfolk
fled into the Darklands; they are nearly extinct today.
Core Rulebook
434
KOBOLD
The largest factions compete with lesser sovereign nations
for wealth, power, and influence, and they sometimes
rival even larger nations. In some cases, nations take
the risky step of relying upon these powerful factions,
making them an extension of government itself (as is the
case with some Hellknights in Cheliax, for example). In
other cases, such as that of the Red Mantis, entire nations
bow to the power of these organizations. Smaller groups,
while less rich in resources, nonetheless inspire great zeal
in their members. Those groups that strive to grow in size,
influence, or wealth frequently attract more dedicated
and motivated members.
The factions summarized below represent a sampling
of those active in the Inner Sea region. Some, like the
Pathfinder Society and the Aspis Consortium, are
widespread and powerful; their influence can be found
throughout the world. Others, such as the Firebrands
and the Sczarni, are disorganized or regional in scope.
All encourage adventurers to join their ranks, although
the benefits each faction can offer an adventurer
varies widely.
Aspis Consortium
The sprawling mercantile concern known
as the Aspis Consortium is structured to
ensure that the survival of the faction is
more important than any single member. Originally
founded as a private trading endeavor, the Consortium
has grown to be one of the largest business ventures in the
Inner Sea region. Most of the group’s members are skilled
merchants and mercenaries, and the organization has
made a merciless and bloodthirsty name for itself when it
comes to ensuring its profits. The Aspis Consortium has
clashed many times with the Pathfinder Society.
Bellflower Network
The unsavory practice of slavery continues
to be a strong economic force in diabolic
Cheliax. Here, halflings are particularly
valued as slaves, for they work hard and take up only
half the room of a human laborer. It should come as no
surprise, then, to learn of the Bellflower Network, an
organization founded by halfling freedom fighters that
accepts any into its ranks, provided they aid the network
in its goal of freeing all slaves from servitude and helping
them escape from oppressive lands like Cheliax.
Esoteric Order of the
Palatine Eye
Based in the nation of Ustalav, the
scholars and philosophers of this
semisecret society have long stood
against the Whispering Way (page 441), but more recent
events have placed them in opposition to the sinister goals
of the Night Heralds. When left to their own devices,
however, members of this faction prefer to explore and
study dusty secrets hidden in the past, particularly those
still awaiting rediscovery in the regions of the Golden
Road—especially in the nation of Osirion.
Eagle Knights
The Eagle Knights are the protectors and
defenders of the people of Andoran. The
group itself consists of four subfactions—
the Steel Falcons (who protect Andoran’s
interests beyond its borders), the Golden Legion
(Andoran’s defenders and the commanders of its armies),
the Gray Corsairs (nautical agents who specialize in
fighting the slave trade), and the Twilight Talons (spies
and deep cover agents).
Firebrands
Not all factions have central bases of
operation or organized hierarchies of
command. The loosely affiliated freedom
fighters, swashbuckling heroes, and
entertainers known as the Firebrands are one such group.
They are united by a desire to fight oppression, oppose
tyrannical regimes, free slaves, rescue the wrongfully
accused, and engage in jolly cooperation with like-minded
heroes—all while building their own individual
reputations and wealth. This group of defenders has
proven surprisingly difficult for oppressive governments
and cruel religions to defeat.
Free Captains
To an outside observer or a merchant
whose ship has been looted or sunk, the
pirates of the Shackles may seem like
Factions
While nations and faiths command vast resources and control entire regions, they must still
compete for the loyalty of their followers. In addition to being swayed by church and state,
many people are influenced by societal groups known as factions. These groups vary wildly
in size and purpose—from local thieves’ guilds interested only in filling the pockets and
bellies of their members, to far-reaching, international commercial conglomerates with their
own private armies.
THE AGE OF LOST OMENS
435
8
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
a disorganized scourge. But in truth, these pirates are
bound by a complex code of, if not honor, then a mutual
recognition that it’s always good to have allies on the
open seas. The Shackles are ruled by a council of pirate
lords who call themselves the Free Captains; they sail
the southern Arcadian Ocean and follow their own code
of rules when it comes to who can be raided and what
can be sunk—even if, to their victims, those rules seem
capricious and arbitrary.
Hellknights
Several different orders of the mercenaries
known collectively as Hellknights operate
in Avistan, with most of their number
stationed in the nation of Cheliax. These mercenaries see
the law of the land as inviolate and offer their services
as enforcers to any who can pay their prices. They wear
distinctive suits of intimidating armor and take the
legends of Hell as inspiration, but they see no one but
themselves as the true arbiters of law.
Knights of Lastwall
For centuries, the nation of Lastwall stood
as a bulwark against the orcs of Belkzen
and the lingering threat of the Whispering
Tyrant. But when the Whispering Tyrant escaped
his prison, he brought to his enemies in Lastwall a
devastating apocalypse. Now Lastwall is destroyed,
and the knights who once served there are without a
home. In its absence, they have formed a ragtag group
known as the Knights of Lastwall, and they carry on
their charge to stand against the undead legions of the
Whispering Tyrant wherever their skills are needed.
Lion Blades
The Lion Blades of Taldor are a secret
organization committed to protecting the
interests of Taldor and its ruler. They oppose
Taldor’s many enemies, foreign and domestic, through
a program of infiltration, espionage, and assassination.
One of the major goals of the Lion Blades is to rein in
corruption within the empire (aside from corruption that
is useful to them); another is keeping any one faction of
the imperial court from becoming powerful enough to
upset the status quo. Through its shadow schools, the
Lion Blades intensively train new recruits before investing
them with a high degree of initiative and latitude.
Magaambya
Golarion reeled from the disaster of
Earthfall, and its peoples took long to
recover. But recover they did, and one
of the first institutions to rise from the ashes of near
destruction was the Magaambya, an academy of arcane
learning founded by the legendary wizard known as OldMage Jatembe. Today, the scholars of Magaambya not
only preserve ancient magical traditions founded in those
early days but also protect the learning and culture of the
Mwangi people as a whole.
Night Heralds
The Night Heralds turn to the lure of the
starlit night for guidance, seeking advice
and aid from forces far removed from
Golarion. The sinister aliens of the Dominion of the
Black hold special importance for the Night Heralds,
and many Night Heralds worship these inscrutable
beings almost as gods. Night Heralds seek and collect
obscure texts and mysterious lore from the ancient past
and peruse the secrets they find within to unravel larger
hidden meanings and obscured truths beyond reality.
Their hope is that when the world inevitably falls to
alien influence, they will be rewarded for their service by
the world’s new masters.
Pathfinder Society
Many of the greatest explorers and
adventurers of the modern age have
recorded their discoveries in an ongoing
series of chapbooks known as the Pathfinder Chronicles,
published irregularly by the Pathfinder Society itself.
This diverse group is devoted to exploring the world,
supporting its agents in the field, and ensuring the
discoveries they make are documented. The Society
often finds itself in conflict with the more mercenary
Aspis Consortium. The Pathfinder Society’s pursuit of
discovery often puts its agents in the thick of developing
plots, forcing them to choose between being heroes or
villains as events unfold.
Red Mantis
It’s easy to know if an assassination is the
work of the notorious Red Mantis; they
typically kill with a sacred sawtooth saber,
have a knack for targeting their victims in public or in
sanctuaries believed to be safe, and take steps to ensure
that those they are contracted to kill stay dead. Their
prices change with each mission, but no matter the offer,
the Red Mantis never targets rightfully ruling monarchs,
for their own deity, the mantis god Achaekek, forbids
the murder of those with a divine mandate to rule.
Sczarni
The Sczarni are a collection of Varisian
bandits, smugglers, and thieves. They are
organized into tightly knit families, each
of which has little or nothing in common with Sczarni
in other locations beyond shared skills, techniques, and
pursuits. Their crimes focus on thievery, scams, and other
relatively nonviolent acts, but since these crimes have
a tendency to spiral out of control, their schemes often
result in violence anyway.
Core Rulebook
436
Deities
Anyone can worship a deity, but those who do so devoutly
should take care to pursue the faith’s edicts (behaviors
the faith encourages) and avoid its anathemas (actions
considered blasphemous). Each deity below has their
alignment listed in parentheses after their name, followed
by a short description and their edicts, anathemas, and
the alignments permitted for followers. Following that are
benefits available to the most ardent devotees of the deities.
You get these benefits only if you’re a cleric of the deity
or some other rule specifically gives you a devotee benefit.
Abadar (LN)
The Master of the First Vault holds sway over cities,
the law, merchants, and wealth. Abadar seeks to
bring civilization to the wild places of the world,
encourages adherence to law, and promotes commerce and
trade within civilization. He also encourages cooperation
among the various ancestries.
Edicts bring civilization to the frontiers, earn wealth through
hard work and trade, follow the rule of law
Anathema engage in banditry or piracy, steal, undermine a
law-abiding court
Follower Alignments LG, LN, LE
Devotee Benefits
Divine Font harm or heal
Divine Skill Society
Favored Weapon crossbow
Domains cities, earth, travel, wealth
Cleric Spells 1st: illusory object, 4th: creation, 7th: magnificent
mansion
Asmodeus (LE)
The Prince of Darkness reigns over contracts,
pride, slavery, and tyranny, and he delights
in tempting mortals to the path of evil. He
promotes strict hierarchies where everyone knows their place,
and he takes advantage of order for his own selfish benefit.
Edicts negotiate contracts to your best advantage, rule
tyrannically and torture weaker beings, show subservience
to your betters
Anathema break a contract, free a slave, insult Asmodeus by
showing mercy to your enemies
Follower Alignments LE
Devotee Benefits
Divine Font harm
Divine Skill Deception
Favored Weapon mace
Domains confidence, fire, trickery, tyranny
Cleric Spells 1st: charm, 4th: suggestion, 6th: mislead
Calistria (CN)
The mischievous goddess known as the
Savored Sting extols the virtues of lust,
revenge, and trickery. Though Calistria is
most widely worshipped by elves, members
of many other ancestries follow her as well.
Edicts pursue your personal freedom, seek hedonistic thrills,
take revenge
Anathema become too consumed by love or a need for
revenge, let a slight go unanswered
Follower Alignments CG, CN, CE
Devotee Benefits
Divine Font harm or heal
Divine Skill Deception
Favored Weapon whip
Domains pain, passion, secrecy, trickery
Cleric Spells 1st: charm, 3rd: enthrall, 6th: mislead
Cayden Cailean (CG)
The Drunken Hero ascended from mortal life
on a drunken dare, becoming the god of ale,
freedom, and wine. Cayden promotes freedom
and encourages others to find their own path in life. He fights
for just causes and delights in the best indulgences.
Edicts drink, free slaves and aid the oppressed, seek glory
and adventure
Anathema waste alcohol, be mean or standoffish when drunk,
own a slave
Follower Alignments NG, CG, CN
Devotee Benefits
Divine Font heal
Divine Skill Athletics
Favored Weapon rapier
Domains cities, freedom, indulgence, might
Cleric Spells 1st: fleet step, 2nd: touch of idiocy, 5th: hallucination
Religion
Selection of a deity is critical for certain classes—like champion and cleric—but most
characters pay respect to at least one deity to find a focus in life and guide their choices,
especially in times of hardship or need. Some people instead worship a group of deities
arranged in a pantheon, follow a nondeific religion like the Green Faith, or adhere to a
specific philosophy. Note that far more deities, religions, and philosophies exist on any
world, Golarion included, than those detailed below.
THE AGE OF LOST OMENS
437
8
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Desna (CG)
The kindly Song of the Spheres presides over
dreams, luck, stars, and travelers. An ancient
goddess, Desna delights in freedom and mystery, and she
encourages her followers to do the same.
Edicts aid fellow travelers, explore new places, express yourself
through art and song, find what life has to offer
Anathema cause fear or despair, cast nightmare or use similar
magic to corrupt dreams, engage in bigoted behavior
Follower Alignments NG, CG, CN
Devotee Benefits
Divine Font heal
Divine Skill Acrobatics
Favored Weapon starknife
Domains dreams, luck, moon, travel
Cleric Spells 1st: sleep, 3rd: dream message, 5th: dreaming
potential
Erastil (LG)
Old Deadeye is god of family, farming,
hunting, and trade. Long ago he was a horned
god of the hunt, but his worship evolved to
focus on rural communities.
Edicts care for your home and family, fulfill your duties, keep
the peace, protect the community
Anathema abandon your home in its time of need, choose
yourself over your community, tarnish your reputation,
tell lies
Follower Alignments LG, NG, LN
Devotee Benefits
Divine Font heal
Divine Skill Survival
Favored Weapon longbow
Domains earth, family, nature, wealth
Cleric Spells 1st: true strike, 3rd: wall of thorns, 5th: tree stride
Gorum (CN)
Soldiers call out prayers to Our Lord in Iron,
god of battle, strength, and weapons. Gorum
emphasizes strength and power, encouraging his followers to
seek out war and combat as the ultimate way to worship him.
Edicts attain victory in fair combat, push your limits, wear
armor in combat
Anathema kill prisoners or surrendering foes, prevent conflict
through negotiation, win a battle through underhanded
tactics or indirect magic
Follower Alignments CN, CE
Devotee Benefits
Divine Font harm or heal
Divine Skill Athletics
Favored Weapon greatsword
Domains confidence, destruction, might, zeal
Cleric Spells 1st: true strike, 2nd: enlarge, 4th: weapon storm
Gozreh (N)
A deity of two aspects, known as the Wind
and the Waves, Gozreh rules over nature,
the sea, and weather. Gozreh is popular with
druids and those who seek to preserve the wilds.
Edicts cherish, protect, and respect nature in all its forms
Anathema bring civilization to intrude on the wild, create
undead, despoil areas of natural beauty
Follower Alignments NG, LN, N, CN, NE
Devotee Benefits
Divine Font heal
Divine Skill Survival
Favored Weapon trident
Domains air, nature, travel, water
Cleric Spells 1st: gust of wind, 3rd: lightning bolt, 5th: control
water
Iomedae (LG)
Iomedae is goddess of honor, justice, rulership, and
valor, and she is called the Inheritor because she
inherited her mantle when the god of humanity
perished. Prior to her ascension, Iomedae walked
the planet as a mortal. Many paladins follow her faith.
Edicts be temperate, fight for justice and honor, hold valor in
your heart
Anathema abandon a companion in need, dishonor yourself,
refuse a challenge from an equal
Follower Alignments LG, NG
Devotee Benefits
Divine Font heal
Divine Skill Intimidation
Favored Weapon longsword
Domains confidence, might, truth, zeal
Cleric Spells 1st: true strike, 2nd: see invisibility, 4th: fire shield
Irori (LN)
When the Master of Masters attained true
enlightenment, he became a god of history,
knowledge, and self-perfection. Irori promotes discipline and
teaches that one who can master themself finds the greatest
benefits the world can provide.
Edicts be humble; help others perfect themselves; hone
your body, mind, and spirit to a more perfect state;
practice discipline
Anathema become addicted to a substance, destroy an important
historical text, repeatedly fail to maintain self-control
Follower Alignments LG, LN, LE
Devotee Benefits
Divine Font harm or heal
Divine Skill Athletics
Favored Weapon fist
Domains knowledge, might, perfection, truth
Cleric Spells 1st: jump, 3rd: haste, 4th: stoneskin
Core Rulebook
438
Lamashtu (CE)
The Mother of Monsters is goddess of
aberrance, monsters, and nightmares. She
seeks to corrupt mortals and populate the
world with her twisted and monstrous brood.
Edicts bring power to outcasts and the downtrodden, indoctrinate
children in Lamashtu’s teachings, make the beautiful
monstrous, reveal the corruption and flaws in all things
Anathema attempt to treat a mental illness or deformity,
provide succor to Lamashtu’s enemies
Follower Alignments CE
Devotee Benefits
Divine Font harm or heal
Divine Skill Survival
Favored Weapon falchion
Domains family, might, nightmares, trickery
Cleric Spells 1st: magic fang, 2nd: animal form, 4th: nightmare
Nethys (N)
The All-Seeing Eye, god of magic, has a dualistic
nature of destruction and preservation; his ability
to witness all things has shattered his mind.
Edicts seek out magical power and use it
Anathema pursue mundane paths over magical ones
Follower Alignments NG, LN, N, CN, NE
Devotee Benefits
Divine Font harm or heal
Divine Skill Arcana
Favored Weapon staff
Domains destruction, knowledge, magic, protection
Cleric Spells 1st: magic missile, 2nd: magic mouth, 3rd: levitate,
4th: blink, 5th: prying eye, 6th: wall of force, 7th: warp mind,
8th: maze, 9th: disjunction
Norgorber (NE)
The god of greed, murder, poison, and
secrets has four aspects: Blackfingers, ally
of alchemists and poisoners; the murderous
Father Skinsaw; the thieving Gray Master; and the secretive
Reaper of Reputation.
Edicts keep your true identity secret, sacrifice anyone necessary,
take every advantage in a fight, work from the shadows
Anathema allow your true identity to be connected to your
dark dealings, share a secret freely, show mercy
Follower Alignments LE, NE, CE, plus N if following the Reaper
of Reputation
Devotee Benefits
Divine Font harm
Divine Skill Stealth
Favored Weapon shortsword
Domains death, secrecy, trickery, wealth
Cleric Spells 1st: illusory disguise, 2nd: invisibility, 4th:
phantasmal killer
Pharasma (N)
Ancient and powerful beyond even most other
gods, the Lady of Graves presides over birth,
death, fate, and prophecy. From her throne in
the Boneyard, she judges the souls of all who perish, and she
ensures that the natural cycle of birth and death—the River of
Souls—is not disrupted.
Edicts strive to understand ancient prophecies, destroy
undead, lay bodies to rest
Anathema create undead, desecrate a corpse, rob a tomb
Follower Alignments NG, LN, N
Devotee Benefits
Divine Font heal
Divine Skill Medicine
Favored Weapon dagger
Domains death, fate, healing, knowledge
Cleric Spells 1st: mindlink, 3rd: ghostly weapon, 4th:
phantasmal killer
Rovagug (CE)
The Rough Beast is the god of destruction,
disaster, and wrath. He was long ago
imprisoned within Golarion’s core at the
hands of many other deities working in concert, and seeks to
one day break free and wreak havoc upon the world.
Edicts destroy all things, free Rovagug from his prison
Anathema create something new, let material ties restrain
you, torture a victim or otherwise delay its destruction
Follower Alignments NE, CE
Devotee Benefits
Divine Font harm
Divine Skill Athletics
Favored Weapon greataxe
Domains air, destruction, earth, zeal
Cleric Spells 1st: burning hands, 2nd: enlarge, 6th: disintegrate
Sarenrae (NG)
The Dawnflower is goddess of healing, honesty,
redemption, and the sun. Once a powerful angel
and empyreal lord, Sarenrae led the charge to
imprison Rovagug. She seeks to redeem evil
where possible, or else destroy it swiftly.
Edicts destroy the Spawn of Rovagug, protect allies, provide
aid to the sick and wounded, seek and allow redemption
Anathema create undead, lie, deny a repentant creature an
opportunity for redemption, fail to strike down evil
Follower Alignments LG, NG, CG
Devotee Benefits
Divine Font heal
Divine Skill Medicine
Favored Weapon scimitar
Domains fire, healing, sun, truth
Cleric Spells 1st: burning hands, 3rd: fireball, 4th: wall of fire
THE AGE OF LOST OMENS
439
8
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Shelyn (NG)
The Eternal Rose is the goddess of art, beauty,
love, and music. She seeks to one day redeem
her corrupted brother, Zon-Kuthon. Shelyn
promotes peace and love, and she encourages her followers to
create beauty in a sometimes dark world.
Edicts be peaceful, choose and perfect an art, lead by example,
see the beauty in all things
Anathema destroy art or allow it to be destroyed, unless saving
a life or pursuing greater art; refuse to accept surrender
Follower Alignments LG, NG, CG
Devotee Benefits
Divine Font heal
Divine Skill select Crafting or Performance
Favored Weapon glaive
Domains creation, family, passion, protection
Cleric Spells 1st: color spray, 3rd: enthrall, 4th: creation
Torag (LG)
The dwarven deity called the Father of Creation
is god of the forge, protection, and strategy.
Though most widely worshipped by dwarves,
those who treasure crafting and creation also follow Torag.
Edicts be honorable and forthright, keep your word, respect
the forge, serve your people
Anathema tell lies or cheat someone, intentionally create
inferior works, show mercy to the enemies of your people
Follower Alignments LG, LN
Devotee Benefits
Divine Font heal
Divine Skill Crafting
Favored Weapon warhammer
Domains creation, earth, family, protection
Cleric Spells 1st: mindlink, 3rd: earthbind, 4th: creation
Urgathoa (NE)
The amoral Pallid Princess oversees disease,
gluttony, and undeath.
Edicts become undead upon death, create or
protect the undead, sate your appetites
Anathema deny your appetites, destroy undead, sacrifice
your life
Follower Alignments LE, NE, CE
Devotee Benefits
Divine Font harm
Divine Skill Intimidation
Favored Weapon scythe
Domains indulgence, magic, might, undeath
Cleric Spells 1st: goblin pox, 2nd: false life, 7th: mask of terror
Zon-Kuthon (LE)
The Midnight Lord is god of darkness, envy, loss,
and pain. Once a god of art, beauty, and music,
like Shelyn, he returned from a sojourn in the dark spaces
between the planes horribly changed.
Edicts bring pain to the world, mutilate your body
Anathema create permanent or long-lasting sources of light,
provide comfort to those who suffer
Follower Alignments LN, LE, NE
Devotee Benefits
Divine Font harm
Divine Skill Intimidation
Favored Weapon spiked chain
Domains ambition, darkness, destruction, pain
Cleric Spells 1st: phantom pain, 3rd: wall of thorns, 5th:
shadow walk
Faiths and Philosophies
Of course, faith can express itself in more ways than
venerating a single deity—or a deity at all. A few examples
of nondeific religions and philosophies are presented
below. Clerics can work with allied faiths and philosophies,
but the organizations here turn to other classes—such as
sorcerers with divine bloodlines, druids, or monks—to
serve as their leaders. These faiths and philosophies don’t
have an external godhead that offers benefits to devotees.
Atheism
While most concede that the gods exist, some do not view
them as worthy of worship, and a few even deny their
presence altogether.
Edicts pursue your own agenda with faith in your own ability
to excel
Anathema offer prayers to a deity
Follower Alignments all
Green Faith
The worshippers of the Green Faith count many
druids among their number. They view nature
as divine and draw strength from the knowledge
of their place in the natural order.
Edicts guide civilization to grow in harmony
with nature, preserve areas of natural wilderness, protect
endangered species
Anathema cause damage to natural settings, kill animals for
reasons other than self-defense or sustenance, allow abuse
of natural resources
Follower Alignments CN, LN, N, NE, NG
Prophecies of Kalistrade
The dream-records of an eccentric mystic teach
that wealth can be achieved through a strict
and abstemious code of behavior.
Edicts accumulate personal wealth, foster and
aid mercantile pursuits, welcome newcomers
regardless of gender or ancestry
Anathema spend money frivolously; offer money to those who
Core Rulebook
440
don’t deserve wealth; overindulge in physical pleasures,
food, or drink
Follower Alignments LG, LN, LE
Whispering Way
These cultists believe undeath is the truest form
of existence, and life is meant to be spent in
preparation for transition to a more glorious
unlife after death.
Edicts seek methods to become undead (a lich
TABLE 8–2: DOMAINS
Domain Description Domain Spell Advanced Domain Spell
Ambition You strive to keep up with and outpace the competition. Blind ambition Competitive edge
Air You can control winds and the weather. Pushing gust Disperse into air
Cities You have powers over urban environments and denizens. Face in the crowd Pulse of the city
Confidence You overcome your fear and project pride. Veil of confidence Delusional pride
Creation You have divine abilities related to crafting and art. Splash of art Artistic flourish
Darkness You operate in the darkness and take away the light. Cloak of shadow Darkened eyes
Death You have the power to end lives and destroy undead. Death’s call Eradicate undeath
Destruction You are a conduit for divine devastation. Cry of destruction Destructive aura
Dreams You have the power to enter and manipulate dreams. Sweet dream Dreamer’s call
Earth You control soil and stone. Hurtling stone Localized quake
Family You aid and protect your family and community Soothing words Unity
more effectively.
Fate You see and understand hidden inevitabilities. Read fate Tempt fate
Fire You control flame. Fire ray Flame barrier
Freedom You liberate yourself and others from shackles Unimpeded stride Word of freedom
and constraints.
Healing Your healing magic is particularly potent. Healer’s blessing Rebuke death
Indulgence You feast mightily and can shake off the effects Overstuff Take its course
of overindulging.
Knowledge You receive divine insights. Scholarly recollection Know the enemy
Luck You’re unnaturally lucky and keep out of harm’s way. Bit of luck Lucky break
Magic You perform the unexpected and inexplicable. Magic’s vessel Mystic beacon
Might Your physical power is bolstered by divine strength. Athletic rush Enduring might
Moon You command powers associated with the moon. Moonbeam Touch of the moon
Nature You hold power over animals and plants. Vibrant thorns Nature’s bounty
Nightmares You fill minds with horror and dread. Waking nightmare Shared nightmare
Pain You punish those who displease you with the sharp Savor the sting Retributive pain
sting of pain.
Passion You evoke passion, whether as love or lust. Charming touch Captivating adoration
Perfection You strive to perfect your mind, body, and spirit. Perfected mind Perfected form
Protection You ward yourself and others. Protector’s sacrifice Protector’s sphere
Secrecy You protect secrets and keep them hidden. Forced quiet Safeguard secret
Sun You harness the power of the sun and other light Dazzling flash Positive luminance
sources, and punish undead.
Travel You have power over movement and journeys. Agile feet Traveler’s transit
Trickery You deceive others and cause mischief. Sudden shift Trickster’s twin
Truth You pierce lies and discover the truth. Word of truth Glimpse the truth
Tyranny You wield power to rule and enslave others. Touch of obedience Commanding lash
Undeath Your magic carries close ties to the undead. Touch of undeath Malignant sustenance
Water You control water and bodies of water. Tidal surge Downpour
Wealth You hold power over wealth, trade, and treasure. Appearance of wealth Precious metals
Zeal Your inner fire increases your combat prowess. Weapon surge Zeal for battle

if possible), oppose those who seek to destroy undead,
protect necromantic secrets, serve the Whispering Tyrant
Anathema destroy necromantic texts (unless they reveal secrets
of the Whispering Way), teach others of the Whispering Way
other than by whispering, use positive energy to harm undead
Domains
The following domains are used by the primary deities of
Golarion, as listed on pages 437–440.
THE AGE OF LOST OMENS
441
8
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Core Rulebook
442
Chapter 9: Playing the Game
At this point, you have a character and are ready to play Pathfinder! Or maybe you’re
the GM and you are getting ready to run your first adventure. Either way, this chapter
provides the full details for the rules outlined in Chapter 1: Introduction. This chapter
begins by describing the general rules and conventions of how the game is played and then
presents more in-depth explanations of the rules for each mode of play.
Before diving into how to play Pathfinder, it’s important to
understand the game’s three modes of play, which determine
the pace of your adventure and the specific rules you’ll use
at a given time. Each mode provides a different pace and
presents a different level of risk to your characters. The
Game Master (GM) determines which mode works best
for the story and controls the transition between them.
You’ll likely talk about the modes less formally during
your play session, simply transitioning between exploration
and encounters during the adventure, before heading to a
settlement to achieve something during downtime.
The most intricate of the modes is encounter mode. This
is where most of the intense action takes place, and it’s most
often used for combat or other high-stakes situations. The
GM typically switches to encounter mode by calling on
the players to “roll for initiative” to determine the order in
which all the actors take their turns during the encounter.
Time is then divided into a series of rounds, each lasting
roughly 6 seconds in the game world. Each round, player
characters, other creatures, and sometimes even hazards or
events take their turn in initiative order. At the start of a
participant’s turn, they gain the use of a number of actions
(typically 3 in the case of PCs and other creatures) as well as
a special action called a reaction. These actions, and what
you do with them, are how you affect the world within
an encounter. The full rules for playing in encounter mode
start on page 468.
In exploration mode, time is more flexible and the play
more free form. In this mode, minutes, hours, or even
days in the game world pass quickly in the real world, as
the characters travel cross country, explore uninhabited
sections of a dungeon, or roleplay during a social
gathering. Often, developments during exploration lead to
encounters, and the GM will switch to that mode of play
until the encounter ends, before returning to exploration
mode. The rules for exploration start on page 479.
The third mode is downtime. During downtime, the
characters are at little risk, and the passage of time is
measured in days or longer. This is when you might forge a
magic sword, research a new spell, or prepare for your next
adventure. The rules for downtime are on page 481.
General Rules
Before exploring the specific rules of each mode of play,
you’ll want to understand a number of general rules of
the game. To one degree or another, these rules are used
in every mode of play.
Making Choices
Pathfinder is a game where your choices determine the
story’s direction. Throughout the game, the GM describes
what’s happening in the world and then asks the players, “So
what do you do?” Exactly what you choose to do, and how
the GM responds to those choices, builds a unique story
experience. Every game is different, because you’ll rarely,
if ever, make the same decisions as another group of players.
This is true for the GM as well—two GMs running the exact
same adventure will put different emphasis and flourishes
on the way they present each scenario and encounter.
Often, your choices have no immediate risk or
consequences. If you’re traveling along a forest path and
come across a fork in the trail, the GM will ask, “Which
way do you go?” You might choose to take the right fork
or the left. You could also choose to leave the trail, or just
go back to town. Once your choice is made, the GM tells
you what happens next. Down the line, that choice may
impact what you encounter later in the game, but in many
cases nothing dangerous happens immediately.
But sometimes what happens as a result of your choices
is less than certain. In those cases, you’ll attempt a check.
Checks
When success isn’t certain—whether you’re swinging a
sword at a foul beast, attempting to leap across a chasm, or
straining to remember the name of the earl’s second cousin
at a soiree—you’ll attempt a check. Pathfinder has many
types of checks, from skill checks to attack rolls to saving
throws, but they all follow these basic steps.
1. Roll a d20 and identify the modifiers, bonuses,
and penalties that apply.
2. Calculate the result.
3. Compare the result to the difficulty class (DC).
4. Determine the degree of success and the effect.
Checks and difficulty classes (DC) both come in many
forms. When you swing your sword at that foul beast,
you’ll make an attack roll against its Armor Class, which
is the DC to hit another creature. If you are leaping across
that chasm, you’ll attempt an Athletics skill check with a
9
443
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
DC based on the distance you are trying to jump. When
calling to mind the name of the earl’s second cousin,
you attempt a check to Recall Knowledge. You might
use either the Society skill or a Lore skill you have
that’s relevant to the task, and the DC depends on how
common the knowledge of the cousin’s name might be,
or how many drinks your character had when they were
introduced to the cousin the night before.
No matter the details, for any check you must roll the
d20 and achieve a result equal to or greater than the DC
to succeed. Each of these steps is explained below.
Step 1: Roll D20 and Identify The Modifiers,
Bonuses, and Penalties That Apply
Start by rolling your d20. You’ll then identify all the
relevant modifiers, bonuses, and penalties that apply to the
roll. A modifier can be either positive or negative, but a
bonus is always positive, and a penalty is always negative.
The sum of all the modifiers, bonuses, and penalties you
apply to the d20 roll is called your total modifier for that
statistic.
Nearly all checks allow you to add an ability modifier to
the roll. An ability modifier represents your raw capabilities
and is derived from an ability score, as described on page
20. Exactly which ability modifier you use is determined by
what you’re trying to accomplish. Usually a sword swing
applies your Strength modifier, whereas remembering the
name of the earl’s cousin uses your Intelligence modifier.
When attempting a check that involves something you
have some training in, you will also add your proficiency
bonus. This bonus depends on your proficiency rank:
untrained, trained, expert, master, or legendary. If you’re
untrained, your bonus is +0—you must rely on raw
talent and any bonuses from the situation. Otherwise, the
bonus equals your character’s level plus a certain amount
depending on your rank. If your proficiency rank is trained,
this bonus is equal to your level + 2, and higher proficiency
ranks further increase the amount you add to your level.
Proficiency Rank Proficiency Bonus
Untrained 0
Trained Your level + 2
Expert Your level + 4
Master Your level + 6
Legendary Your level + 8
There are three other types of bonus that frequently
appear: circumstance bonuses, item bonuses, and status
bonuses. If you have different types of bonus that would
apply to the same roll, you’ll add them all. But if you have
multiple bonuses of the same type, you can use only the
highest bonus on a given roll—in other words, they don’t
“stack.” For instance, if you have both a proficiency bonus
and an item bonus, you add both to your d20 result, but
if you have two item bonuses that could apply to the same
check, you add only the higher of the two.
GAME CONVENTIONS
Pathfinder has many specific rules, but you’ll also want to
keep these general guidelines in mind when playing.
The GM Has the Final Say
If you’re ever uncertain how to apply a rule, the GM decides.
Of course, Pathfinder is a game, so when adjudicating the
rules, the GM is encouraged to listen to everyone’s point of
view and make a decision that is both fair and fun.
Specific Overrides General
A core principle of Pathfinder is that specific rules
override general ones. If two rules conflict, the more
specific one takes precedence. If there’s still ambiguity,
the GM determines which rule to use. For example, the
rules state that when attacking a concealed creature, you
must attempt a DC 5 flat check to determine if you hit. Flat
checks don’t benefit from modifiers, bonuses, or penalties,
but an ability that’s specifically designed to overcome
concealment might override and alter this. If a rule doesn’t
specify otherwise, default to the general rules presented
in this chapter. While some special rules may also state the
normal rules to provide context, you should always default
to the normal rules even if effects don’t specifically say to.
Rounding
You may need to calculate a fraction of a value, like halving
damage. Always round down unless otherwise specified.
For example, if a spell deals 7 damage and a creature takes
half damage from it, that creature takes 3 damage.
Multiplying
When more than one effect would multiply the same
number, don’t multiply more than once. Instead, combine
all the multipliers into a single multiplier, with each
multiple after the first adding 1 less than its value. For
instance, if one ability doubled the duration of one of your
spells and another one doubled the duration of the same
spell, you would triple the duration, not quadruple it.
Duplicate Effects
When you’re affected by the same thing multiple times, only
one instance applies, using the higher level of the effects, or
the newer effect if the two are the same level. For example,
if you were using mage armor and then cast it again, you’d
still benefit from only one casting of that spell. Casting a
spell again on the same target might get you a better
duration or effect if it were cast at a higher level the second
time, but otherwise doing so gives you no advantage.
Ambiguous Rules
Sometimes a rule could be interpreted multiple ways. If one
version is too good to be true, it probably is. If a rule seems
to have wording with problematic repercussions or doesn’t
work as intended, work with your group to find a good
solution, rather than just playing with the rule as printed.
Core Rulebook
444
Circumstance bonuses typically involve the situation
you find yourself in when attempting a check. For
instance, using Raise a Shield with a buckler grants you a
+1 circumstance bonus to AC. Being behind cover grants
you a +2 circumstance bonus to AC. If you are both
behind cover and Raising a Shield, you gain only the +2
circumstance bonus for cover, since they’re the same type
and the bonus from cover is higher.
Item bonuses are granted by some item that you
are wearing or using, either mundane or magical. For
example, armor gives you an item bonus to AC, while
expanded alchemist’s tools grant you an item bonus to
Crafting checks when making alchemical items.
Status bonuses typically come from spells, other
magical effects, or something applying a helpful, often
temporary, condition to you. For instance, the 3rd-level
heroism spell grants a +1 status bonus to attack rolls,
Perception checks, saving throws, and skill checks. If
you were under the effect of heroism and someone cast
the bless spell, which also grants a +1 status bonus on
attacks, your attack rolls would gain only a +1 status
bonus, since both spells grant a +1 status bonus to those
rolls, and you only take the highest status bonus.
Penalties work very much like bonuses. You can have
circumstance penalties, status penalties, and sometimes
even item penalties. Like bonuses of the same type, you
take only the worst all of various penalties of a given
type. However, you can apply both a bonus and a penalty
of the same type on a single roll. For example, if you had
a +1 status bonus from a heroism spell but a –2 status
penalty from the sickened condition, you’d apply them
both to your roll—so heroism still helps even though
you’re feeling unwell.
Unlike bonuses, penalties can also be untyped, in which
case they won’t be classified as “circumstance,” “item,” or
“status.” Unlike other penalties, you always add all your
untyped penalties together rather than simply taking the
worst one. For instance, when you use attack actions,
you incur a multiple attack penalty on each attack you
make on your turn after the first attack, and when you
attack a target that’s beyond your weapon’s normal
range increment, you incur a range penalty on the attack.
Because these are both untyped penalties, if you make
multiple attacks at a faraway target, you’d apply both the
multiple attack penalty and the range penalty to your roll.
Once you’ve identified all your various modifiers,
bonuses, and penalties, you move on to the next step.
Step 2: Calculate the Result
This step is simple. Add up all the various modifiers,
bonuses, and penalties you identified in Step 1—this is
your total modifier. Next add that to the number that came
up on your d20 roll. This total is your check result.
Step 3: Compare the Result to the DC
This step can be simple, or it can create suspense. Sometimes
you’ll know the Difficulty Class (DC) of your check. In these
cases, if your result is equal to or greater than the DC, you
succeed! If your roll anything less than the DC, you fail.
Other times, you might not know the DC right away.
Swimming across a river would require an Athletics check,
but it doesn’t have a specified DC—so how will you know
if you succeed or fail? You call out your result to the GM
and they will let you know if it is a success, failure, or
otherwise. While you might learn the exact DC through
trial and error, DCs sometimes change, so asking the GM
whether a check is successful is the best way to determine
whether or not you have met or exceeded the DC.
Calculating DCs
Whenever you attempt a check, you compare your result
against a DC. When someone or something else attempts
a check against you, rather than both forces rolling
against one another, the GM (or player, if the opponent is
another PC) compares their result to a fixed DC based on
your relevant statistic. Your DC for a given statistic is 10
+ the total modifier for that statistic.
Step 4: Determine the Degree of Success
and Effect
Many times, it’s important to determine not only if you
succeed or fail, but also how spectacularly you succeed or
fail. Exceptional results—either good or bad—can cause
you to critically succeed at or critically fail a check.
You critically succeed at a check when a check’s result
meets or exceeds the DC by 10 or more. If the check is an
attack roll, this is sometimes called a critical hit. You can
also critically fail a check. The rules for critical failure—
sometimes called a fumble—are the same as those for a
critical success, but in the other direction: if you fail a
check by 10 or more, that’s a critical failure.
If you rolled a 20 on the die (a “natural 20”), your result
is one degree of success better than it would be by numbers
alone. If you roll a 1 on the d20 (a “natural 1”), your
result is one degree worse. This means that a natural 20
Number
on the die
+ Ability
modifier
Proficiency bonus
Circumstance bonus
Status bonus
Item bonus
Circumstance penalty
Status penalty
Item penalty
All untyped penalties
+ + = Result
CALCULATING CHECK RESULTS If you have more than one bonus or penalty of a
particular type, apply only the highest
445
PLAYING THE GAME 9
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
usually results in a critical success and natural 1 usually
results in a critical failure. However, if you were going up
against a very high DC, you might get only a success with
a natural 20, or even a failure if 20 plus your total modifier
is 10 or more below the DC. Likewise, if your modifier for
a statistic is so high that adding it to a 1 from your d20 roll
exceeds the DC by 10 or more, you can succeed even if you
roll a natural 1! If a feat, magic item, spell, or other effect
does not list a critical success or critical failure, treat is as
an ordinary success or failure instead.
Some other abilities can change the degree of success for
rolls you get. When resolving the effect of an ability that
changes your degree of success, always apply the adjustment
from a natural 20 or natural 1 before anything else.
Specific Checks
While most checks follow these basic rules, it’s useful to
know about a few specific types of checks, how they’re
used, and how they differ from one another.
Attack Rolls
When you use a Strike action or any other attack action,
you attempt a check called an attack roll. Attack rolls take
a variety of forms and are often highly variable based on
the weapon you are using for the attack, but there are three
main types: melee attack rolls, ranged attack rolls, and spell
attack rolls. Spell attack rolls work a little bit differently, so
they are explained separately on the next page.
Melee attack rolls use Strength as their ability modifier by
default. If you’re using a weapon or attack with the finesse
trait, then you can use your Dexterity modifier instead.
Melee attack roll result = d20 roll + Strength
modifier (or optionally Dexterity modifier for
a finesse weapon) + proficiency bonus + other
bonuses + penalties
Ranged attack rolls use Dexterity as their ability modifier.
Ranged attack roll result = d20 roll + Dexterity
modifier + proficiency bonus + other bonuses +
penalties
When attacking with a weapon, whether melee or ranged,
you add your proficiency bonus for the weapon you’re using.
Your class determines your proficiency rank for various
weapons. Sometimes, you’ll have different proficiency ranks
for different weapons. For instance, at 5th level, a fighter
gains the weapon mastery class feature, which grants master
proficiency with the simple and martial weapons of one
weapon group, expert proficiency with advanced weapons
of that group and other simple and martial weapons, and
trained proficiency in all other advanced weapons.
The bonuses you might apply to attack rolls can come
from a variety of sources. Circumstance bonuses can come
from the aid of an ally or a beneficial situation. Status
bonuses are typically granted by spells and other magical
aids. The item bonus to attack rolls comes from magic
weapons—notably, a weapon’s potency rune (page 580).
Penalties to attack rolls come from situations and effects
as well. Circumstance penalties come from risky tactics
or detrimental circumstances, status penalties come from
spells and magic working against you, and item penalties
occur when you use a shoddy item (page 273). When
making attack rolls, two main types of untyped penalties
are likely to apply. The first is the multiple attack penalty,
and the second is the range penalty. The first applies
anytime you make more than one attack action during the
course of your turn, and the other applies only with ranged
or thrown weapons. Both are described below.
Multiple Attack Penalty
The more attacks you make beyond your first in a single
turn, the less accurate you become, represented by the
multiple attack penalty. The second time you use an
attack action during your turn, you take a –5 penalty to
your attack roll. The third time you attack, and on any
subsequent attacks, you take a –10 penalty to your attack
roll. Every check that has the attack trait counts toward
your multiple attack penalty, including Strikes, spell attack
rolls, certain skill actions like Shove, and many others.
Some weapons and abilities reduce multiple attack
penalties, such as agile weapons, which reduce these
penalties to –4 on the second attack or –8 on further attacks.
Attack Multiple Attack Penalty Agile
First None None
Second –5 –4
Third or subsequent –10 –8
Always calculate your multiple attack penalty for the
weapon you’re using on that attack. For example, let’s say
you’re wielding a longsword in one hand and a shortsword
(which has the agile trait) in your other hand, and you are
going to make three Strikes with these weapons during the
course of your turn. The first Strike you make during your
turn has no penalty, no matter what weapon you are using.
The second Strike will take either a –5 penalty if you use
the longsword or a –4 penalty if you use the shortsword.
Just like the second attack, the penalty for your third attack
is based on which weapon you’re using for that particular
Strike. It would be a –10 penalty with the longsword and
a –8 penalty with the shortsword, no matter what weapon
you used for your previous Strikes.
The multiple attack penalty applies only during your
turn, so you don’t have to keep track of it if you can
perform an Attack of Opportunity or a similar reaction
that lets you make a Strike on someone else’s turn.
Range Penalty
Ranged and thrown weapons each have a listed range
Core Rulebook
446
use your Charisma modifier unless the ability that granted
them states otherwise. Focus spells and other sources of
spells specify which ability modifier you use for spell attack
rolls in the ability that granted them. If you have spells from
multiple sources or traditions, you might use different ability
modifiers for spell attack rolls for these different sources of
spells. For example, a dwarf cleric with the Stonewalker
ancestry feat would use her Charisma modifier when casting
meld into stone from that feat, since it’s a divine innate spell,
but she would use her Wisdom modifier when casting heal
and other spells using her cleric divine spellcasting.
Determine the spell attack roll with the following formula.
Spell attack roll result = d20 roll + ability modifier
used for spellcasting + proficiency bonus + other
bonuses + penalties
If you have the ability to cast spells, you’ll have a
proficiency rank for your spell attack rolls, so you’ll
always add a proficiency bonus. Like your ability
modifier, this proficiency rank may vary from one spell
increment, and attacks with them grow less accurate
against targets farther away (range and range increments
are covered in depth on page 279). As long as your target is
at or within the listed range increment, also called the first
range increment, you take no penalty to the attack roll. If
you’re attacking beyond that range increment, you take a
–2 penalty for each additional increment beyond the first.
You can attempt to attack with a ranged weapon or thrown
weapon up to six range increments away, but the farther
away you are, the harder it is to hit your target.
For example, the range increment of a crossbow is 120
feet. If you are shooting at a target no farther away than
that distance, you take no penalty due to range. If they’re
beyond 120 feet but no more than 240 feet away, you
take a –2 penalty due to range. If they’re beyond 240 feet
but no more than 360 feet away, you take a –4 penalty
due to range, and so on, until you reach the last range
increment: beyond 600 feet but no more than 720 feet
away, where you take a –10 penalty due to range.
Armor Class
Attack rolls are compared to a special difficulty class called
an Armor Class (AC), which measures how hard it is for
your foes to hit you with Strikes and other attack actions.
Just like for any other check and DC, the result of an
attack roll must meet or exceed your AC to be successful,
which allows your foe to deal damage to you.
Armor Class is calculated using the following formula.
Armor Class = 10 + Dexterity modifier (up to your
armor’s Dex Cap) + proficiency bonus + armor’s
item bonus to AC + other bonuses + penalties
Use the proficiency bonus for the category (light,
medium, or heavy) or the specific type of armor you’re
wearing. If you’re not wearing armor, use your proficiency
in unarmored defense.
Armor Class can benefit from bonuses with a variety
of sources, much like attack rolls. Armor itself grants an
item bonus, so other item bonuses usually won’t apply to
your AC, but magic armor can increase the item bonus
granted by your armor.
Penalties to AC come from situations and effects in
much the same way bonuses do. Circumstance penalties
come from unfavorable situations, and status penalties
come from effects that impede your abilities or from
broken armor. You take an item penalty when you wear
shoddy armor (page 273).
Spell Attack Rolls
If you cast spells, you might be able to make a spell attack
roll. These rolls are usually made when a spell makes an
attack against a creature’s AC.
The ability modifier for a spell attack roll depends on
how you gained access to your spells. If your class grants
you spellcasting, use your key ability modifier. Innate spells
STRIDING AND STRIKING
Two of the simplest and most common actions you’ll use in
combat are Stride and Strike, described in full on page 471.
Stride is an action that has the move trait and that
allows you to move a number of feet up to your Speed.
You’ll often need to Stride multiple times to reach a foe
who’s far away or to run from danger! Move actions can
often trigger reactions or free actions. However, unlike
other actions, a move action can trigger reactions not
only when you first use the action, but also for every 5
feet you move during that action, as described on page
474. The Step action (page 471) lets you move without
triggering reactions, but only 5 feet.
Strike is an action that has the attack trait and that
allows you to attack with a weapon you’re wielding or an
unarmed attack (such as a fist).
If you’re using a melee weapon or unarmed attack, your
target must be within your reach; if you’re attacking with
a ranged weapon, your target must be within range. Your
reach is how far you can physically extend a part of your
body to make an unarmed attack, or the farthest distance
you can reach with a melee weapon. This is typically 5
feet, but special weapons and larger creatures have longer
reaches. Your range is how far away you can attack with
a ranged weapon or with some types of magical attacks.
Different weapons and magical attacks have different
maximum ranges, and ranged weapons get less effective
as you exceed their range increments.
Striking multiple times in a turn has diminishing
returns. The multiple attack penalty (detailed on page
446) applies to each attack after the first, whether those
attacks are Strikes, special attacks like the Grapple action
of the Athletics skill, or spell attack rolls.
447
PLAYING THE GAME 9
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
to another if you have spells from multiple sources. Spell
attack rolls can benefit from circumstance bonuses and
status bonuses, though item bonuses to spell attack rolls
are rare. Penalties affect spell attack rolls just like any
other attack roll—including your multiple attack penalty.
Many times, instead of requiring you to make a spell
attack roll, the spells you cast will require those within
the area or targeted by the spell to attempt a saving
throw against your Spell DC to determine how the spell
affects them.
Your spell DC is calculated using the following formula.
Spell DC = 10 + ability modifier used for
spellcasting + proficiency bonus + other bonuses +
penalties
Perception
Perception measures your ability to be aware of your
environment. Every creature has Perception, which works
with and is limited by a creature’s senses (described on
page 464). Whenever you need to attempt a check based
on your awareness, you’ll attempt a Perception check.
Your Perception uses your Wisdom modifier, so you’ll use
the following formula when attempting a Perception check.
Perception check result = d20 roll + Wisdom
modifier + proficiency bonus + other bonuses +
penalties
Nearly all creatures are at least trained in Perception, so
you will almost always add a proficiency bonus to your
Perception modifier. You might add a circumstance
bonus for advantageous situations or
environments, and typically get status bonuses
from spells or other magical effects. Items can
also grant you a bonus to Perception, typically
in a certain situation. For instance, a fine spyglass
grants a +1 item bonus to Perception when attempting
to see something a long distance away. Circumstance
penalties to Perception occur when an environment or
situation (such as fog) hampers your senses, while status
penalties typically come from conditions, spells, and magic
effects that foil the senses. You’ll rarely encounter item
penalties or untyped penalties for Perception.
Many abilities are compared to your Perception DC to
determine whether they succeed. Your Perception DC is
10 + your total Perception modifier.
Perception for Initiative
Often, you’ll roll a Perception check to determine your order
in initiative. When you do this, instead of comparing the
result against a DC, everyone in the encounter will compare
their results. The creature with the highest result acts first,
the creature with the second-highest result goes second, and
so on. Sometimes you may be called on to roll a skill check
for initiative instead, but you’ll compare results just as if
you had rolled Perception. The full rules for initiative are
found in the rules for encounter mode on page 468.
Saving Throws
There are three types of saving throws: Fortitude
saves, Reflex saves, and Will saves. In all
cases, saving throws measure your ability
to shrug off harmful effects in the form
of afflictions, damage, or conditions. You’ll
Core Rulebook
448
always add a proficiency bonus to each save. Your class
might give a different proficiency to each save, but you’ll
be trained at minimum. Some circumstances and spells
might give you circumstance or status bonuses to saves,
and you might find resilient armor or other magic items
that give an item bonus.
Fortitude saving throws allow you to reduce the effects
of abilities and afflictions that can debilitate the body.
They use your Constitution modifier and are calculated
as shown in the formula below.
Fortitude save result = d20 roll + Constitution
modifier + proficiency bonus + other bonuses +
penalties
Reflex saving throws measure how well you can
respond quickly to a situation and how gracefully you
can avoid effects that have been thrown at you. They use
your Dexterity modifier and are calculated as shown in
the formula below.
Reflex save result = d20 roll + Dexterity modifier +
proficiency bonus + other bonuses + penalties
Will saving throws measure how well you can resist
attacks to your mind and spirit. They use your Wisdom
modifier and are calculated as shown in the formula below.
Will save result = d20 roll + Wisdom modifier +
proficiency bonus + other bonuses + penalties
Sometimes you’ll need to know your DC for a given
saving throw. The DC for a saving throw is 10 + the total
modifier for that saving throw.
Most of the time, when you attempt a saving throw,
you don’t have to use your actions or your reaction.
You don’t even need to be able to act to attempt saving
throws. However, in some special cases you might have
to take an action to attempt a save. For instance, you can
try to recover from the sickened condition by spending an
action to attempt a Fortitude save.
Basic Saving Throws
Sometimes you will be called on to attempt a basic saving
throw. This type of saving throw works just like any
other saving throw—the “basic” part refers to the effects.
For a basic save, you’ll attempt the check and determine
whether you critically succeed, succeed, fail, or critically
fail like you would any other saving throw. Then one of
the following outcomes applies based on your degree of
success—no matter what caused the saving throw.
Critical Success You take no damage from the spell, hazard, or
effect that caused you to attempt the save.
Success You take half the listed damage from the effect.
Failure You take the full damage listed from the effect.
Critical Failure You take double the listed damage from the effect.
Skill Checks
Pathfinder has a variety of skills, from Athletics to
Medicine to Occultism. Each grants you a set of related
actions that rely on you rolling a skill check. Each skill
has a key ability score, based on the scope of the skill
in question. For instance, Athletics deals with feats of
physical prowess, like swimming and jumping, so its key
ability score is Strength. Medicine deals with the ability
to diagnose and treat wounds and ailments, so its key
ability score is Wisdom. The key ability score for each
skill is listed in Chapter 4: Skills. No matter which
skill you’re using, you calculate a check for it using the
following formula.
Skill check result = d20 roll + modifier of the
skill’s key ability score + proficiency bonus + other
bonuses + penalties
You’re unlikely to be trained in every skill. When
using a skill in which you’re untrained, your proficiency
bonus is +0; otherwise, it equals your level plus 2 for
trained, or higher once you become expert or better.
The proficiency rank is specific to the skill you’re using.
Aid from another character or some other beneficial
situation may grant you a circumstance bonus. A status
bonus might come from a helpful spell or magical effect.
Sometimes tools related to the skill grant you an item
bonus to your skill checks. Conversely, unfavorable
situations might give you a circumstance penalty to your
skill check, while harmful spells, magic, or conditions
might also impose a status penalty. Using shoddy or
makeshift tools might cause you to take an item penalty.
Sometimes a skill action can be an attack, and in these
cases, the skill check might take a multiple attack
penalty, as described on page 446.
When an ability calls for you to use the DC for a
specific skill, you can calculate it by adding 10 + your
total modifier for that skill.
FORTUNE AND MISFORTUNE EFFECTS
Fortune and misfortune effects can alter how you roll
your dice. These abilities might allow you to reroll a
failed roll, force you to reroll a successful roll, allow you
to roll twice and use the higher result, or force you to roll
twice and use the lower result.
You can never have more than one fortune and more
than one misfortune effect come into play on a single roll.
For instance, if an effect lets you roll twice and use the
higher roll, you can’t then use Halfling Luck (a fortune
effect) to reroll if you fail. If multiple fortune effects would
apply, you have to pick which to use. If two misfortune
effects apply, the GM decides which is worse and applies it.
If both a fortune effect and a misfortune effect would
apply to the same roll, the two cancel each other out, and
you roll normally.
449
PLAYING THE GAME 9
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Notating Total Modifiers
When creating your character and adventuring you’ll
record the total modifier for various important checks on
your character sheet. Since many bonuses and penalties
are due to the immediate circumstances, spells, and other
temporary magical effects, you typically won’t apply
them to your notations.
Item bonuses and penalties are often more persistent,
so you will often want to record them ahead of time. For
instance, if you are using a weapon with a +1 weapon
potency rune, you’ll want to add the +1 item bonus to
your notation for your attack rolls with that weapon,
since you will include that bonus every time you attack
with that weapon. But if you have a fine spyglass, you
wouldn’t add its item bonus to your Perception check
notation, since you gain that bonus only if you are using
sight—and the spyglass!—to see long distances.
Special Checks
Some categories of checks follow special rules. The most
notable are flat checks and secret checks.
Flat Checks
When the chance something will happen or fail to happen
is based purely on chance, you’ll attempt a flat check. A flat
check never includes any modifiers, bonuses, or penalties—
you just roll a d20 and compare the result on the die to
the DC. Only abilities that specifically apply to flat checks
can change the checks’ DCs; most such effects affect only
certain types of flat checks.
If more than one flat check would ever cause or prevent
the same thing, just roll once and use the highest DC. In the
rare circumstance that a flat check has a DC of 1 or lower,
skip rolling; you automatically succeed. Conversely, if one
ever has a DC of 21 or higher, you automatically fail.
Secret Checks
Sometimes you as the player shouldn’t know the exact
result and effect of a check. In these situations, the rules
(or the GM) will call for a secret check. The secret trait
appears on anything that uses secret checks. This type of
check uses the same formulas you normally would use for
that check, but is rolled by the GM, who doesn’t reveal the
result. Instead, the GM simply describes the information or
effects determined by the check’s result. If you don’t know
a secret check is happening (for instance, if the GM rolls
a secret Fortitude save against a poison that you failed to
notice), you can’t use any fortune or misfortune abilities
(see the sidebar on page 449) on that check, but if a fortune
or misfortune effect would apply automatically, the GM
applies it to the secret check. If you know that the GM is
attempting a secret check—as often happens with Recall
Knowledge or Seek—you can usually activate fortune or
misfortune abilities for that check. Just tell the GM, and
they’ll apply the ability to the check.
The GM can choose to make any check secret, even if
it’s not usually rolled secretly. Conversely, the GM can
let you roll any check yourself, even if that check would
usually be secret. Some groups find it simpler to have players
roll all secret checks and just try to avoid acting on any
out-of-character knowledge, while others enjoy the mystery.
Damage
In the midst of combat, you attempt checks to determine
if you can damage your foe with weapons, spells, or
alchemical concoctions. On a successful check, you hit
and deal damage. Damage decreases a creature’s Hit
Points on a 1-to-1 basis (so a creature that takes 6 damage
loses 6 Hit Points). The full rules can be found in the Hit
Points, Healing, and Dying section on page 459.
Damage is sometimes given as a fixed amount, but more
often than not you’ll make a damage roll to determine
how much damage you deal. A damage roll typically uses
a number and type of dice determined by the weapon
or unarmed attack used or the spell cast, and it is often
enhanced by various modifiers, bonuses, and penalties.
Like checks, a damage roll—especially a melee weapon
damage roll—is often modified by a number of modifiers,
penalties, and bonuses. When making a damage roll, you
take the following steps, explained in detail below.
1. Roll the dice indicated by the weapon, unarmed
attack, or spell, and apply the modifiers, bonuses,
and penalties that apply to the result of the roll.
2. Determine the damage type.
3. Apply the target’s immunities, weaknesses, and
resistances to the damage.
4.If any damage remains, reduce the target’s Hit
Points by that amount.
Step 1: Roll The Damage Dice and Apply
Modifiers, Bonuses, and Penalties
Your weapon, unarmed attack, spell, or sometimes even
a magic item determines what type of dice you roll for
damage, and how many. For instance, if you’re using
a normal longsword, you’ll roll 1d8. If you’re casting
a 3rd-level fireball spell, you’ll roll 6d6. Sometimes,
especially in the case of weapons, you’ll apply modifiers,
bonuses, and penalties to the damage.
When you use melee weapons, unarmed attacks, and
thrown ranged weapons, the most common modifier you’ll
add to damage is your Strength ability modifier. Weapons
with the propulsive trait sometimes add half your Strength
modifier. You typically do not add an ability modifier to
spell damage, damage from most ranged weapons, or
damage from alchemical bombs and similar items.
As with checks, you might add circumstance, status,
or item bonuses to your damage rolls, but if you have
multiple bonuses of the same type, you add only the highest
bonus of that type. Again like checks, you may also apply
circumstance, status, item, and untyped penalties to the
Core Rulebook
450
damage roll, and again you apply only the greatest penalty
of a specific type but apply all untyped penalties together.
Use the formulas below.
Melee damage roll = damage die of weapon or
unarmed attack + Strength modifier + bonuses +
penalties
Ranged damage roll = damage die of weapon +
Strength modifier for thrown weapons + bonuses
+ penalties
Spell (and similar effects) damage roll = damage
die of the effect + bonuses + penalties
Once your damage die is rolled, and you’ve applied any
modifiers, bonuses, and penalties, move on to Step 2. Though
sometimes there are special considerations, described below.
Increasing Damage
In some cases, you increase the number of dice you roll
when making weapon damage rolls. Magic weapons
etched with the striking rune can add one or more weapon
damage dice to your damage roll. These extra dice are the
same die size as the weapon’s damage die. At certain levels,
most characters gain the ability to deal extra damage from
the weapon specialization class feature.
Persistent Damage
Persistent damage is a condition that causes damage to recur
beyond the original effect. Unlike with normal damage,
when you are subject to persistent damage, you don’t take
it right away. Instead, you take the specified damage at the
end of your turns, after which you attempt a DC 15 flat
check to see if you recover from the persistent damage.
See the Conditions Appendix on pages 618–623 for the
complete rules regarding the persistent damage condition.
Doubling and Halving Damage
Sometimes you’ll need to halve or double an amount of
damage, such as when the outcome of your Strike is a
critical hit, or when you succeed at a basic Reflex save
against a spell. When this happens, you roll the damage
normally, adding all the normal modifiers, bonuses,
and penalties. Then you double or halve the amount as
appropriate (rounding down if you halved it). The GM
might allow you to roll the dice twice and double the
modifiers, bonuses, and penalties instead of doubling
the entire result, but this usually works best for singletarget attacks or spells at low levels when you have a
small number of damage dice to roll. Benefits you gain
specifically from a critical hit, like the flaming weapon
rune’s persistent fire damage or the extra damage die
from the fatal weapon trait, aren’t doubled.
Step 2: Determine The Damage Type
Once you’ve calculated how much damage you deal,
you’ll need to determine the damage type. There are many
types of damage and sometimes certain types are applied
in different ways. The smack of a club deals bludgeoning
damage. The stab of a spear deals piercing damage. The
staccato crack of a lightning bolt spell deals electricity
damage. Sometimes you might apply precision damage,
dealing more damage for hitting a creature in a vulnerable
spot or when the target is somehow vulnerable. The
damage types are described on page 452.
Damage Types and Traits
When an attack deals a type of damage, the attack action
gains that trait. For example, the Strikes and attack
actions you use wielding a sword when its flaming rune is
active gain the fire trait, since the rune gives the weapon
the ability to deal fire damage.
Step 3: Apply the Target’s Immunities,
Weaknesses, and Resistances
Defenses against certain types of damage or effects are
called immunities or resistances, while vulnerabilities are
called weaknesses. Apply immunities first, then weaknesses,
and resistances third. Immunity, weakness, or resistance to
an alignment applies only to damage of that type, not to
damage from an attacking creature of that alignment.
Immunity
When you have immunity to a specific type of damage, you
ignore all damage of that type. If you have immunity to a
specific condition or type of effect, you can’t be affected by
that condition or any effect of that type. If you have immunity
to effects with a certain trait (such as death effects, poison,
or disease) you are unaffected by any effect with that trait.
Often, an effect can be both a trait and a damage type (this is
especially true in the case of energy damage types). In these
cases, the immunity applies to the entire effect, not just the
damage. You can still be targeted by an ability with an effect
you are immune to; you just don’t apply the effect. However,
some complex effects might have parts that affect you even
if you’re immune to one of the effect’s traits; for instance, a
spell that deals both fire and acid damage can still deal acid
damage to you even if you’re immune to fire.
Immunity to critical hits works a little differently. When
a creature immune to critical hits is critically hit by a Strike
or other attack that deals damage, it takes normal damage
instead of double damage. This does not make it immune
to any other critical success effects of other actions that
have the attack trait (such as Grapple and Shove).
Another exception is immunity to nonlethal attacks. If
you are immune to nonlethal attacks, you are immune to
all damage from attacks with the nonlethal trait, no matter
what other type the damage has. For instance, a stone
golem has immunity to nonlethal attacks. This means
that no matter how hard you hit it with your fist, you’re
451
PLAYING THE GAME 9
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Damage has a number of different types and categories,
which are described below.
Physical Damage
Damage dealt by weapons, many physical hazards, and a
handful of spells is collectively called physical damage. The
main types of physical damage are bludgeoning, piercing,
and slashing. Bludgeoning damage comes from weapons
and hazards that deal blunt-force trauma, like a hit from
a club or being dashed against rocks. Piercing damage is
dealt from stabs and punctures, whether from a dragon’s
fangs or the thrust of a spear. Slashing damage is delivered
by a cut, be it the swing of the sword or the blow from a
scythe blades trap.
Ghosts and other incorporeal creatures have a high
resistance to physical attacks that aren’t magical (attacks
that lack the magical trait). Furthermore, most incorporeal
creatures have additional, though lower, resistance to
magical physical damage (such as damage dealt from a
mace with the magical trait) and most other damage types.
Energy Damage
Many spells and other magical effects deal energy damage.
Energy damage is also dealt from effects in the world, such
as the biting cold of a blizzard to a raging forest fire. The
main types of energy damage are acid, cold, electricity, fire,
and sonic. Acid damage can be delivered by gases, liquids,
and certain solids that dissolve flesh, and sometimes
harder materials. Cold damage freezes material by way
of contact with chilling gases and ice. Electricity damage
comes from the discharge of powerful lightning and sparks.
Fire damage burns through heat and combustion. Sonic
damage assaults matter with high-frequency vibration
and sound waves. Many times, you deal energy damage
by casting magic spells, and doing so is often useful
against creatures that have immunities or resistances to
physical damage.
Two special types of energy damage specifically target
the living and the undead. Positive energy often manifests
as healing energy to living creatures but can create
positive damage that withers undead bodies and disrupts
and injures incorporeal undead. Negative energy often
revivifies the unnatural, unliving power of undead, while
manifesting as negative damage that gnaws at the living.
Powerful and pure magical energy can manifest itself
as force damage. Few things can resist this type of
damage—not even incorporeal creatures such as ghosts
and wraiths.
Alignment Damage
Weapons and effects keyed to a particular alignment
can deal chaotic, evil, good, or lawful damage. These
damage types apply only to creatures that have the
opposing alignment trait. Chaotic damage harms only
lawful creatures, evil damage harms only good creatures,
good damage harms only evil creatures, and lawful damage
harms only chaotic creatures.
Mental Damage
Sometimes an effect can target the mind with enough
psychic force to actually deal damage to the creature. When
it does, it deals mental damage. Mindless creatures and
those with only programmed or rudimentary intelligence
are often immune to mental damage and effects.
Poison Damage
Venoms, toxins and the like can deal poison damage, which
affects creatures by way of contact, ingestion, inhalation,
or injury. In addition to coming from monster attacks,
alchemical items, and spells, poison damage is often caused
by ongoing afflictions, which follow special rules described
on page 457.
Bleed Damage
Another special type of physical damage is bleed damage.
This is persistent damage that represents loss of blood.
As such, it has no effect on nonliving creatures or living
creatures that don’t need blood to live. Weaknesses and
resistances to physical damage apply.
Precision Damage
Sometimes you are able to make the most of your attack
through sheer precision. When you hit with an ability that
grants you precision damage, you increase the attack’s listed
damage, using the same damage type, rather than tracking a
separate pool of damage. For example, a non-magical dagger
Strike that deals 1d6 precision damage from a rogue’s sneak
attack increases the piercing damage by 1d6.
Some creatures are immune to precision damage,
regardless of the damage type; these are often amorphous
creatures that lack vulnerable anatomy. A creature immune
to precision damage would ignore the 1d6 precision damage
in the example above, but it would still take the rest of
the piercing damage from the Strike. Since precision
damage is always the same type of damage as the attack
it’s augmenting, a creature that is resistant to physical
damage, like a gargoyle, would resist not only the dagger’s
damage but also the precision damage, even though it is not
specifically resistant to precision damage.
Precious Materials
While not their own damage category, precious materials can
modify damage to penetrate a creature’s resistances or take
advantage of its weaknesses. For instance, silver weapons
are particularly effective against lycanthropes and bypass
the resistances to physical damage that most devils have.
DAMAGE TYPES
Core Rulebook
452
not going to damage it—unless your fists don’t have the
nonlethal trait, such as if you’re a monk.
Temporary Immunity
Some effects grant you immunity to the same effect for a set
amount of time. If an effect grants you temporary immunity,
repeated applications of that effect don’t affect you for as
long as the temporary immunity lasts. Unless the effect says
it applies only to a certain creature’s ability, it doesn’t matter
who created the effect. For example, the blindness spell
says, “The target is temporarily immune to blindness for
1 minute.” If anyone casts blindness on that creature again
before 1 minute passes, the spell has no effect.
Temporary immunity doesn’t prevent or end ongoing
effects of the source of the temporary immunity. For
instance, if an ability makes you frightened and you then gain
temporary immunity to the ability, you don’t immediately
lose the frightened condition due to the immunity you
just gained—you simply don’t become frightened if you’re
targeted by the ability again before the immunity ends.
Weakness
If you have a weakness to a certain type of damage or
damage from a certain source, that type of damage is extra
effective against you. Whenever you would take that type
of damage, increase the damage you take by the value of
the weakness. For instance, if you are dealt 2d6 fire damage
and have weakness 5 to fire, you take 2d6+5 fire damage.
If you have more than one weakness that would apply
to the same instance of damage, use only the highest
applicable weakness value. This usually happens only
when a monster is weak to both a type of physical damage
and the material a weapon is made of.
Resistance
If you have resistance to a type of damage, each time
you take that type of damage, you reduce the amount of
damage you take by the listed amount (to a minimum of 0
damage). Resistance can specify combinations of damage
types or other traits. For instance, you might encounter
a monster that’s resistant to non-magical bludgeoning
damage, meaning it would take less damage from
bludgeoning attacks that weren’t magical, but would take
normal damage from your +1 mace (since it’s magical)
or a non-magical spear (since it deals piercing damage).
A resistance also might have an exception. For example,
resistance 10 to physical damage (except silver) would
reduce any physical damage by 10 unless that damage
was dealt by a silver weapon.
If you have more than one type of resistance that
would apply to the same instance of damage, use only the
highest applicable resistance value.
It’s possible to have resistance to all damage. When an
effect deals damage of multiple types and you have resistance
to all damage, apply the resistance to each type of damage
separately. If an attack would deal 7 slashing damage and
4 fire damage, resistance 5 to all damage would reduce the
slashing damage to 2 and negate the fire damage entirely.
Step 4: If Damage Remains, Reduce the
Target’s Hit Points
After applying the target’s immunities, resistances, and
weaknesses to the damage, whatever damage is left
reduces the target’s Hit Points on a 1-to-1 basis. More
information about Hit Points can be found in the Hit
Points, Healing, and Dying section on page 459.
Nonlethal Attacks
You can make a nonlethal attack in an effort to knock
someone out instead of killing them (see Knocked Out
and Dying on page 459). Weapons with the nonlethal
trait (including fists) do this automatically. You take a
–2 circumstance penalty to the attack roll when you make
a nonlethal attack using a weapon that doesn’t have the
nonlethal trait. You also take this penalty when making a
lethal attack using a nonlethal weapon.
Conditions
The results of various checks might apply conditions to
you or, less often, an item. Conditions change your state of
being in some way. You might be gripped with fear or made
faster by a spell or magic item. One condition represents
what happens when a creature successfully drains your
blood or life essence, while others represent creatures’
attitudes toward you and how they interact with you.
Conditions are persistent; when you’re affected by a
condition, its effects last until the stated duration ends, the
condition is removed, or terms dictated in the condition
cause it to end. The rules for conditions are summarized
on page 454 and described in full on pages 618–623.
Effects
Anything you do in the game has an effect. Many of
these outcomes are easy to adjudicate during the game.
If you tell the GM that you draw your sword, no check
is needed, and the result is that your character is now
holding a sword. Other times, the specific effect requires
more detailed rules governing how your choice is resolved.
Many spells, magic items, and feats create specific effects,
and your character will be subject to effects caused by
monsters, hazards, the environment, and other characters.
While a check might determine the overall impact or
strength of an effect, a check is not always part of creating
an effect. Casting a fly spell on yourself creates an effect
that allows you to soar through the air, but casting the spell
does not require a check. Conversely, using the Intimidate
skill to Demoralize a foe does require a check, and your
result on that check determines the effect’s outcome.
The following general rules are used to understand and
apply effects.
453
PLAYING THE GAME 9
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
These conditions appear often in the game and are defined
in detail in the Conditions Appendix on pages 618–623.
Here’s a brief summary of each.
Blinded: You’re unable to see.
Broken: This item can’t be used for its
normal function until repaired.
Clumsy: You can’t move as easily or gracefully as usual.
Concealed: Fog or similar obscuration
makes you difficult to see and target.
Confused: You attack indiscriminately.
Controlled: Another creature determines your actions.
Dazzled: Everything is concealed to you.
Deafened: You’re unable to hear.
Doomed: With your soul in peril, you
are now closer to death.
Drained: Blood loss or something similar
has leached your vitality.
Dying: You’re slipping closer to death.
Encumbered: You’re carrying more weight
than you can manage.
Enfeebled: Your strength has been sapped away.
Fascinated: You are compelled to focus
your attention on something.
Fatigued: Your defenses are lower and
you can’t focus while exploring.
Flat-Footed: You’re unable to defend
yourself to your full capability.
Fleeing: You must run away.
Friendly: An NPC with this condition
has a good attitude toward you.
Frightened: Fear makes you less capable
of attacking and defending.
Grabbed: A creature, object, or magic holds you in place.
Helpful: An NPC with this condition wants to assist you.
Hidden: A creature you’re hidden from knows
your location but can’t see you.
Hostile: An NPC with this
condition wants to harm you.
Immobilized: You can’t move.
Indifferent: An NPC with this condition
doesn’t have a strong opinion about you.
Invisible: Creatures can’t see you.
Observed: You’re in plain view.
Paralyzed: You body
is frozen in place.
Persistent Damage: You keep
taking damage every round.
Petrified: You’ve been turned to stone.
Prone: You’re lying on the ground and easier to attack.
Quickened: You get an extra action each turn.
Restrained: You’re tied up and can’t move, or
a grappling creature has you pinned.
Sickened: You’re sick to your stomach.
Slowed: You lose actions each turn.
Stunned: You can’t use actions.
Stupefied: Your can’t access your full mental
faculties, and you have trouble casting spells.
Unconscious: You’re asleep or knocked out.
Undetected: A creature you’re undetected
by doesn’t know where you are.
Unfriendly: An NPC with this condition doesn’t like you.
Unnoticed: A creature is entirely unaware you’re present.
Wounded: You’ve been brought back from the
brink of death but haven’t fully recovered.
CONDITIONS
Core Rulebook
454
Duration
Most effects are discrete, creating an instantaneous effect
when you let the GM know what actions you are going
to use. Firing a bow, moving to a new space, or taking
something out of your pack all resolve instantly. Other
effects instead last for a certain duration. Once the duration
has elapsed, the effect ends. The rules generally use the
following conventions for durations, though spells have
some special durations detailed on pages 304–305.
For an effect that lasts a number of rounds, the remaining
duration decreases by 1 at the start of each turn of the
creature that created the effect. This is common for beneficial
effects that target you or your allies. Detrimental effects often
last “until the end of the target’s next turn” or “through” a
number of their turns (such as “through the target’s next 3
turns”), which means that the effect’s duration decreases at
the end of the creature’s turn, rather than the start.
Instead of lasting a fixed number of rounds, a duration
might end only when certain conditions are met (or cease to
be true). If so, the effects last until those conditions are met.
Range and Reach
Actions and other abilities that generate an effect typically
work within a specified range or a reach. Most spells and
abilities list a range—the maximum distance from the
creature or object creating the effect in which the effect
can occur.
Ranged and thrown weapons have a range increment.
Attacks with such weapons work normally up to that
range. Attacks against targets beyond that range take a –2
penalty, which worsens by 2 for every additional multiple
of that range, to a maximum of a –10 penalty after five
additional range increments. Attacks beyond this range
are not possible. For example, if you are using a shortbow,
your attacks take no penalty against a target up to 60 feet
away, a –2 penalty if a target is over 60 and up to 120 feet
away, a –4 if a target is over 120 and up to 180 feet away,
and so on, up to a maximum distance of 360 feet.
Reach is how far you can physically reach with your body
or a weapon. Melee Strikes rely on reach. Your reach also
creates an area around your space where other creatures
could trigger your reactions. Your reach is typically 5 feet,
but weapons with the reach trait can extend this. Larger
creatures can have greater reach; for instance, an ogre has
a 10-foot reach. Unlike with measuring most distances, 10-
foot reach can reach 2 squares diagonally. Reach greater
than 10 feet is measured normally; 20-foot reach can reach
3 squares diagonally, 25-foot reach can reach 4, and so on.
Targets
Some effects require you to choose specific targets.
Targeting can be difficult or impossible if your chosen
creature is undetected by you, if the creature doesn’t match
restrictions on who you can target, or if some other ability
prevents it from being targeted.
Some effects require a target to be willing. Only you
can decide whether your PC is willing, and the GM
decides whether an NPC is willing. Even if you or your
455
PLAYING THE GAME 9
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
character don’t know what the effect is, such as if your
character is unconscious, you still decide if you’re willing.
Some effects target or require an ally, or otherwise
refer to an ally. This must be someone on your side, often
another PC, but it might be a bystander you are trying to
protect. You are not your own ally. If it isn’t clear, the GM
decides who counts as an ally or an enemy.
Areas
Some effects occupy an area of a specified shape and size.
An area effect always has a point of origin and extends out
from that point. There are four types of areas: emanations,
bursts, cones, and lines. When you’re playing in encounter
mode and using a grid, areas are measured in the same
way as movement (page 463), but areas’ distances are
never reduced or affected by difficult terrain (page 475) or
lesser cover (page 476). You can use the diagrams below
as common reference templates for areas, rather than
measuring squares each time. Many area effects describe
only the effects on creatures in the area. The GM determines
any effects to the environment and unattended objects.
Burst
A burst effect issues forth in all directions from a single
[[areas diagram 3/4 page]]
EMANATION
CONE
BURST
LINE
5 feet
M
10 feet
5 feet
L
10 feet
5 feet
10 feet
15 feet
20 feet
30 feet
15-foot diagonal
30-foot diagonal
15-foot orthogonal
30-foot orthogonal
60-foot diagonal
60-foot orthogonal
30-foot lines
60-foot lines
M L
M M
M
M
M
M
AREAS
Medium or
Smaller Creature M
L Large Creature
Core Rulebook
456
corner of a square within the range of the effect, spreading
in all directions to a specified radius. For instance, when
you cast fireball, it detonates at the corner of a square
within 500 feet of you and creates a 20-foot burst, meaning
it extends out 20 feet in every direction from the corner of
the square you chose, affecting each creature whose space
(or even one square of its space) is within the burst.
Cone
A cone shoots out from you in a quarter circle on the grid.
When you aim a cone, the first square of that cone must
share an edge with your space if you’re aiming orthogonally,
or it must touch a corner of your space if you’re aiming
diagonally. If you’re Large or larger, the first square can
run along the edge of any square of your space. You can’t
aim a cone so that it overlaps your space. The cone extends
out for a number of feet, widening as it goes, as shown in
the Areas diagram. For instance, when a green dragon uses
its breath weapon, it breathes a cone of poisonous gas that
originates at the edge of one square of its space and affects
a quarter-circle area 30 feet on each edge.
If you make a cone originate from someone or
something else, follow these same rules, with the first
square of the cone using an edge or corner of that creature
or object’s space instead of your own.
Emanation
An emanation issues forth from each side of your space,
extending out to a specified number of feet in all directions.
For instance, the bless spell’s emanation radiates 5 or more
feet outward from the caster. Because the sides of a target’s
space are used as the starting point for the emanation, an
emanation from a Large or larger creature affects a greater
overall area than that of a Medium or smaller creature.
Line
A line shoots forth from you in a straight line in a direction
of your choosing. The line affects each creature whose
space it overlaps. Unless a line effect says otherwise, it is
5 feet wide. For example, the lightning bolt spell’s area is
a 60-foot line that’s 5 feet wide.
Line of Effect
When creating an effect, you usually need an unblocked
path to the target of a spell, the origin point of an effect’s
area, or the place where you create something with a spell
or other ability. This is called a line of effect. You have line
of effect unless a creature is entirely behind a solid physical
barrier. Visibility doesn’t matter for line of effect, nor do
portcullises and other barriers that aren’t totally solid. If
you’re unsure whether a barrier is solid enough, usually
a 1-foot-square gap is enough to maintain a line of effect,
though the GM makes the final call.
In an area effect, creatures or targets must have line of
effect to the point of origin to be affected. If there’s no
line of effect between the origin of the area and the target,
the effect doesn’t apply to that target. For example, if
there’s a solid wall between the origin of a fireball and
a creature that’s within the burst radius, the wall blocks
the effect—that creature is unaffected by the fireball and
doesn’t need to attempt a save against it. Likewise, any
ongoing effects created by an ability with an area cease
to affect anyone who moves outside of the line of effect.
Line of Sight
Some effects require you to have line of sight to your target.
As long as you can precisely sense the area (as described
in Perception on page 464) and it is not blocked by a
solid barrier (as described in Cover on pages 476–477),
you have line of sight. An area of darkness prevents line
of sight if you don’t have darkvision, but portcullises and
other obstacles that aren’t totally solid do not. If you’re
unsure whether a barrier is solid enough to block line of
sight, usually a 1-foot-square gap is enough to maintain
line of sight, though the GM makes the final call.
Afflictions
Diseases and poisons are types of afflictions, as are curses
and radiation. An affliction can infect a creature for a long
time, progressing through different and often increasingly
debilitating stages. The level of an affliction is the level of
the monster, hazard, or item causing the affliction or, in the
case of a spell, is listed in the affliction entry for that spell.
Format
Whether appearing in a spell, as an item, or within a creature’s
stat block, afflictions appear in the following format.
Name and Traits
The affliction’s name is given first, followed by its traits in
parentheses—including the trait for the type of affliction
(curse, disease, poison, and so forth). If the affliction
needs to have a level specified, it follows the parentheses,
followed by any unusual details, such as restrictions on
removing the conditions imposed by an affliction.
Saving Throw
When you’re first exposed to the affliction, you must
attempt a saving throw against it. This first attempt to
stave off the affliction is called the initial save. An affliction
usually requires a Fortitude save, but the exact save and its
DC are listed after the name and type of affliction. Spells
that can poison you typically use the caster’s spell DC.
On a successful initial saving throw, you are unaffected
by that exposure to the affliction. You do not need to
attempt further saving throws against it unless you are
exposed to the affliction again.
If you fail the initial saving throw, after the affliction’s
onset period elapses (if applicable), you advance to stage 1
of the affliction and are subjected to the listed effect. On
a critical failure, after its onset period (if applicable), you
457
PLAYING THE GAME 9
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
advance to stage 2 of the affliction and are subjected to that
effect instead. The stages of an affliction are described below.
Onset
Some afflictions have onset times. For these afflictions, once
you fail your initial save, you don’t gain the effects for the
first stage of the affliction until the onset time has elapsed.
If this entry is absent, you gain the effects for the first stage
(or the second stage on a critical failure) immediately upon
failing the initial saving throw.
Maximum Duration
If an affliction lasts only a limited amount of time, it lists a
maximum duration. Once this duration passes, the affliction
ends. Otherwise, the affliction lasts until you succeed at
enough saves to recover, as described in Stages below.
Stages
An affliction typically has multiple stages, each of which
lists an effect followed by an interval in parentheses.
When you reach a given stage of an affliction, you are
subjected to the effects listed for that stage.
At the end of a stage’s listed interval, you must attempt
a new saving throw. On a success, you reduce the stage
by 1; on a critical success, you reduce the stage by 2. You
are then subjected to the effects of the new stage. If the
affliction’s stage is ever reduced below stage 1, the affliction
ends and you don’t need to attempt further saves unless
you’re exposed to the affliction again.
On a failure, the stage increases by 1; on a critical failure,
the stage increases by 2. You are then subjected to the
effects listed for the new stage. If a failure or critical failure
would increase the stage beyond the highest listed stage, the
affliction instead repeats the effects of the highest stage.
Conditions from Afflictions
An affliction might give you conditions with a longer or
shorter duration than the affliction. For instance, if an
affliction causes you to be drained but has a maximum
duration of 5 minutes, you remain drained even after the
affliction ends, as is normal for the drained condition. Or,
you might succeed at the flat check to remove persistent
damage you took from an ongoing affliction, but you would
still need to attempt saves to remove the affliction itself, and
failing one might give you new persistent damage.
Multiple Exposures
Multiple exposures to the same curse or disease currently
affecting you have no effect. For a poison, however, failing
the initial saving throw against a new exposure increases
the stage by 1 (or by 2 if you critically fail) without
affecting the maximum duration. This is true even if you’re
within the poison’s onset period, though it doesn’t change
the onset length.
Virulent Afflictions
Afflictions with the virulent trait are harder to remove.
You must succeed at two consecutive saves to reduce a
virulent affliction’s stage by 1. A critical success reduces a
virulent affliction’s stage by only 1 instead of by 2.
Counteracting
Some effects try to counteract spells, afflictions, conditions, or
other effects. Counteract checks compare the power of two
forces and determine which defeats the other. Successfully
counteracting an effect ends it unless noted otherwise.
When attempting a counteract check, add the relevant
skill modifier or other appropriate modifier to your check
against the target’s DC. If you’re counteracting an affliction,
AFFLICTION EXAMPLE
To see how a poison works, let’s look at the arsenic
alchemical item (page 550). The item notes that you can’t
reduce your sickened condition while affected by arsenic,
and has the following text for how the affliction works.
Saving Throw DC 18 Fortitude; Onset 10 minutes;
Maximum Duration 5 minutes; Stage 1 1d4 poison
damage and sickened 1 (1 minute); Stage 2 1d6 poison
damage and sickened 2 (1 minute); Stage 3 2d6 poison
damage and sickened 3 (1 minute)
For example, if you drank a glass of wine laced with
arsenic, you would attempt an initial Fortitude save
against the listed DC of 18. If you fail, you advance to
stage 1. Because of the onset time, nothing happens
for 10 minutes, but once this time passes, you take
1d4 poison damage and become sickened 1. As noted,
you’re unable to reduce the sickened condition you
gain from arsenic. The interval of stage 1 is 1 minute (as
shown in parentheses), so you attempt a new save after
1 minute passes. If you succeed, you reduce the stage
by  1, recovering from the poison. If you fail again, the
stage increases by 1 to stage 2, and you take 1d6 poison
damage and become sickened 2.
If your initial save against the arsenic was a critical
failure, you would advance directly to stage 2. After the
10-minute onset time, you would take 1d6 poison damage
and become sickened 2. Succeeding at your second save
would reduce the stage t by 1 to stage 1, and you’d take
only 1d4 poison damage. Failing the second save would
increase by 1 again to stage 3.
If you reach stage 3 of the poison, either by failing
while at stage 2 or critically failing while at stage 1, you’d
take 2d6 poison damage and be sickened 3. If you failed
or critically failed your saving throw while at stage 3, you
would repeat the effects of stage 3.
Since the poison has a maximum duration of 5 minutes,
you recover from it once the 5 minutes pass, no matter
which stage you’re at.
Core Rulebook
458
the DC is in the affliction’s stat block. If it’s a spell, use the
caster’s DC. The GM can also calculate a DC based on the
target effect’s level. For spells, the counteract check modifier
is your spellcasting ability modifier plus your spellcasting
proficiency bonus, plus any bonuses and penalties that
specifically apply to counteract checks. What you can
counteract depends on the check result and the target’s
level. If an effect is a spell, its level is the counteract level.
Otherwise, halve its level and round up to determine its
counteract level. If an effect’s level is unclear and it came
from a creature, halve and round up the creature’s level.
Critical Success Counteract the target if its counteract level is no
more than 3 levels higher than your effect’s counteract level.
Success Counteract the target if its counteract level is no
more than 1 level higher than your effect’s counteract level.
Failure Counteract the target if its counteract level is lower
than your effect’s counteract level.
Critical Failure You fail to counteract the target.
Hit Points, Healing,
and Dying
All creatures and objects have Hit Points (HP). Your
maximum Hit Point value represents your health,
wherewithal, and heroic drive when you are in good
health and rested. Your maximum Hit Points include
the Hit Points you gain at 1st level from your ancestry
and class, those you gain at higher levels from your class,
and any you gain from other sources (like the Toughness
general feat). When you take damage, you reduce your
current Hit Points by a number equal to the damage dealt.
Some spells, items, and other effects, as well as simply
resting, can heal living or undead creatures. When you
are healed, you regain Hit Points equal to the amount
healed, up to your maximum Hit Points.
Knocked Out and Dying
Creatures cannot be reduced to fewer than 0 Hit Points.
When most creatures reach 0 Hit Points, they die and are
removed from play unless the attack was nonlethal, in which
case they are instead knocked out for a significant amount
of time (usually 1 minute or more). When undead and
construct creatures reach 0 Hit Points, they are destroyed.
Player characters, their companions, and other
significant characters and creatures don’t automatically
die when they reach 0 Hit Points. Instead, they are
knocked out and are at risk of death. At the GM’s
discretion, villains, powerful monsters, special NPCs, and
enemies with special abilities that are likely to bring them
back to the fight (like ferocity, regeneration, or healing
magic) can use these rules as well.
As a player character, when you are reduced to 0 Hit
Points, you’re knocked out with the following effects:
• You immediately move your initiative position to
directly before the creature or effect that reduced
you to 0 HP.
• You gain the dying 1 condition. If the effect that
knocked you out was a critical success from the
attacker or the result of your critical failure, you
gain the dying 2 condition instead. If you have the
wounded condition (page 460), increase your dying
value by an amount equal to your wounded value.
If the damage was dealt by a nonlethal attack or
nonlethal effect, you don’t gain the dying condition;
you are instead unconscious with 0 Hit Points.
Taking Damage while Dying
If you take damage while you already have the dying
condition, increase your dying condition value by 1, or by
2 if the damage came from an attacker’s critical hit or your
own critical failure. If you have the wounded condition,
remember to add the value of your wounded condition to
your dying value.
Recovery Checks
When you’re dying, at the start of each of your turns, you
must attempt a flat check with a DC equal to 10 + your
current dying value to see if you get better or worse. This
is called a recovery check. The effects of this check are
as follows.
Critical Success Your dying value is reduced by 2.
Success Your dying value is reduced by 1.
Failure Your dying value increases by 1.
Critical Failure Your dying value increases by 2.
Conditions Related to Death and Dying
To understand the rules for getting knocked out and
how dying works in the game, you’ll need some more
information on the conditions used in those rules.
Presented below are the rules for the dying, unconscious,
wounded, and doomed conditions.
Dying
You are bleeding out or otherwise at death’s door. While
you have this condition, you are unconscious. Dying
always includes a value. If this value ever reaches dying
4, you die. If you’re dying, you must attempt a recovery
check at the start of your turn each round to determine
whether you get better or worse.
If you lose the dying condition by succeeding at a recovery
check and are still at 0 Hit Points, you remain unconscious,
but you can wake up as described on page 460. You lose
the dying condition automatically and wake up if you
ever have 1 Hit Point or more. Anytime you lose the dying
condition, you gain the wounded 1 condition, or increase
your wounded value by 1 if you already have that condition.
Unconscious
You’re sleeping, or you’ve been knocked out. You can’t act.
You take a –4 status penalty to AC, Perception, and Reflex
saves, and you have the blinded and flat-footed conditions.
When you gain this condition, you fall prone and drop
459
PLAYING THE GAME 9
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
items you are wielding or holding unless the effect states
otherwise or the GM determines you’re in a position in
which you wouldn’t.
If you’re unconscious because you’re dying, you can’t
wake up as long as you have 0 Hit Points. If you’re
restored to 1 Hit Point or more via healing, you lose the
dying and unconscious conditions and can act normally
on your next turn.
If you are unconscious and at 0 Hit Points, but not
dying, you naturally return to 1 Hit Point and awaken
after sufficient time passes. The GM determines how long
you remain unconscious, from a minimum of 10 minutes
to several hours. If you receive healing during this time,
you lose the unconscious condition and can act normally
on your next turn.
If you’re unconscious and have more than 1 Hit Point
(typically because you are asleep or unconscious due to
an effect), you wake up in one of the following ways.
Each causes you to lose the unconscious condition.
• You take damage, provided the damage doesn’t
reduce you to 0 Hit Points. (If the damage reduces
you to 0 Hit Points, you remain unconscious and
gain the dying condition as normal.)
• You receive healing, other than the natural healing
you get from resting.
• Someone nudges or shakes you awake using an
Interact action.
• Loud noise is being made around you—though
this isn’t automatic. At the start of your turn,
you automatically attempt a Perception
check against the noise’s DC (or the
lowest DC if there is more than one
noise), waking up if you succeed.
This is often DC 5 for a battle, but if
creatures are attempting to stay quiet around you,
this Perception check uses their Stealth DC. Some
magical effects make you sleep so deeply that they
don’t allow you to attempt this Perception check.
• If you are simply asleep, the GM decides you wake
up either because you have had a restful night’s
sleep or something disrupted that rest.
Wounded
You have been seriously injured during a fight. Anytime
you lose the dying condition, you become wounded
1 if you didn’t already have the wounded condition. If
you already have the wounded condition, your wounded
condition value instead increases by 1. If you gain the
dying condition while wounded, increase the dying
condition’s value by your wounded value. The wounded
condition ends if someone successfully restores Hit Points
to you with Treat Wounds, or if you are restored to full
Hit Points and rest for 10 minutes.
Doomed
Your life is ebbing away, bringing you ever closer to
death. Some powerful spells and evil creatures can inflict
the doomed condition on you. Doomed always includes
a value. The maximum dying value at which you die is
reduced by your doomed value. For example, if you were
doomed 1, you would die upon reaching dying 3 instead of
dying 4. If your maximum dying value is ever reduced to 0,
you instantly die. When you die, you’re no longer doomed.
Your doomed value decreases by 1 each time you get a
full night’s rest.
Death
After you die, you can’t act or be affected by spells
that target creatures (unless they specifically target
dead creatures), and for all other purposes you
are an object. When you die, you are reduced
to 0 Hit Points if you had a different amount,
and you can’t be brought above 0 Hit Points
as long as you remain dead. Some magic can
bring creatures back to life, such as the
resurrect ritual or the raise dead spell.
Heroic Recovery
If you have at least 1
Hero Point (page 467),
you can spend all of your
remaining Hero Points at the
start of your turn or when your dying
value would increase in order to return to 1
Hit Point, no matter how close to death you
are. You lose the dying condition and
become conscious. You do not
gain the wounded condition (or
increase its value) when you
perform a heroic recovery.
Core Rulebook
460
Death Effects and Instant Death
Some spells and abilities can kill you immediately or bring
you closer to death without needing to reduce you to
0 Hit Points first. These abilities have the death trait and
usually involve negative energy, the antithesis of life. If you
are reduced to 0 Hit Points by a death effect, you are slain
instantly without needing to reach dying 4. If an effect states
it kills you outright, you die without having to reach
dying 4 and without being reduced to 0 Hit Points.
Massive Damage
You die instantly if you ever take damage equal to or
greater than double your maximum Hit Points in one blow.
Temporary Hit Points
Some spells or abilities give you temporary Hit Points.
Track these separately from your current and maximum
Hit Points; when you take damage, reduce your temporary
Hit Points first. Most temporary Hit Points last for a
limited duration. You can’t regain lost temporary Hit
Points through healing, but you can gain more via other
abilities. You can have temporary Hit Points from only one
source at a time. If you gain temporary Hit Points when
you already have some, choose whether to keep the amount
you already have and their corresponding duration or to
gain the new temporary Hit Points and their duration.
Items and Hit Points
Items have Hit Points like creatures, but the rules for
damaging them are different (page 272). An item has a
Hardness statistic that reduces damage the item takes by that
amount. The item then takes any damage left over. If an item
is reduced to 0 HP, it’s destroyed. An item also has a Broken
Threshold. If its HP are reduced to this amount or lower,
it’s broken, meaning it can’t be used for its normal function
and it doesn’t grant bonuses. Damaging an unattended item
usually requires attacking it directly, and can be difficult due
to that item’s Hardness and immunities. You usually can’t
attack an attended object (one on a creature’s person).
Actions
You affect the world around you primarily by using
actions, which produce effects. Actions are most closely
measured and restricted during the encounter mode of
play, but even when it isn’t important for you to keep strict
track of actions, they remain the way in which you interact
with the game world. There are four types of actions: single
actions, activities, reactions, and free actions.
Single actions can be completed in a very short time.
They’re self-contained, and their effects are generated
within the span of that single action. During an encounter,
you get 3 actions at the beginning of your turn, which
you can use as described on page 468.
Activities usually take longer and require using multiple
actions, which must be spent in succession. Stride is a single
action, but Sudden Charge is an activity in which you use
both the Stride and Strike actions to generate its effect.
Reactions have triggers, which must be met for you to
use the reaction. You can use a reaction anytime its trigger is
met, whether it’s your turn or not. In an encounter, you get 1
reaction each round, which you can use as described on page
468. Outside of encounters, your use of reactions is more
flexible and up to the GM. Reactions are usually triggered
by other creatures or by events outside your control.
Free actions don’t cost you any of your actions per
turn, nor do they cost your reaction. A free action with no
trigger follows the same rules as a single action (except
the action cost), and a free action with a trigger follows
the same rules as a reaction (except the reaction cost).
Activities
An activity typically involves using multiple actions to
create an effect greater than you can produce with a
single action, or combining multiple single actions to
produce an effect that’s different from merely the sum of
those actions. In some cases, usually when spellcasting,
an activity can consist of only 1 action, 1 reaction, or
even 1 free action.
An activity might cause you to use specific actions
within it. You don’t have to spend additional actions to
perform them—they’re already factored into the activity’s
required actions. (See Subordinate Actions on page 462.)
You have to spend all the actions of an activity at
once to gain its effects. In an encounter, this means you
must complete it during your turn. If an activity gets
interrupted or disrupted in an encounter (page 462), you
lose all the actions you committed to it.
Exploration and Downtime Activities
Outside of encounters, activities can take minutes, hours,
or even days. These activities usually have the exploration
or downtime trait to indicate they’re meant to be used
during these modes of play. You can often do other things
off and on as you carry out these activities, provided they
aren’t significant activities of their own. For instance, if
you’re Repairing an item, you might move around to
stretch your legs or have a brief discussion—but you
couldn’t also Decipher Writing at the same time.
If an activity that occurs outside of an encounter is
interrupted or disrupted, as described in Disrupting
ACTION ICON KEY
These icons appear in stat blocks as shorthand for each
type of action.
[one-action] Single Action
[two-actions]	 Two-Action Activity
[three-actions]	Three-Action Activity
[reaction] Reaction
[free-action] Free Action
461
PLAYING THE GAME 9
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Actions below, you usually lose the time you put in, but
no additional time beyond that.
Actions with Triggers
You can use free actions that have triggers and reactions
only in response to certain events. Each such reaction and
free action lists the trigger that must happen for you to
perform it. When its trigger is satisfied—and only when it
is satisfied—you can use the reaction or free action, though
you don’t have to use the action if you don’t want to.
There are only a few basic reactions and free actions that
all characters can use. You’re more likely to gain actions
with triggers from your class, feats, and magic items.
Limitations on Triggers
The triggers listed in the stat blocks of reactions and some
free actions limit when you can use those actions. You
can use only one action in response to a given trigger. For
example, if you had a reaction and a free action that both
had a trigger of “your turn begins,” you could use either of
them at the start of your turn—but not both. If two triggers
are similar, but not identical, the GM determines whether
you can use one action in response to each or whether
they’re effectively the same thing. Usually, this decision will
be based on what’s happening in the narrative.
This limitation of one action per trigger is per creature;
more than one creature can use a reaction or free action
in response to a given trigger.
Other Actions
Sometimes you need to attempt something not already
covered by defined actions in the game. When this happens,
the rules tell you how many actions you need to spend, as
well any traits your action might have. For example, a spell
that lets you switch targets might say you can do so “by
spending a single action, which has the concentrate trait.”
Game masters can also use this approach when a character
tries to do something that isn’t covered in the rules.
Gaining and Losing Actions
Conditions can change the number of actions you can use
on your turn, or whether you can use actions at all. The
slowed condition, for example, causes you to lose actions,
while the quickened condition causes you to gain them.
Conditions are detailed in the appendix on pages 618–623.
Whenever you lose a number of actions—whether from
these conditions or in any other way—you choose which
to lose if there’s any difference between them. For instance,
the haste spell makes you quickened, but it limits what you
can use your extra action to do. If you lost an action while
haste was active, you might want to lose the action from
haste first, since it’s more limited than your normal actions.
Some effects are even more restrictive. Certain abilities,
instead of or in addition to changing the number of
actions you can use, say specifically that you can’t use
reactions. The most restrictive form of reducing actions
is when an effect states that you can’t act: this means you
can’t use any actions, or even speak. When you can’t act,
you don’t regain your actions and reaction on your turn.
Disrupting Actions
Various abilities and conditions, such as an Attack of
Opportunity, can disrupt an action. When an action
is disrupted, you still use the actions or reactions you
committed and you still expend any costs, but the action’s
effects don’t occur. In the case of an activity, you usually
lose all actions spent for the activity up through the end of
that turn. For instance, if you began a Cast a Spell activity
requiring 3 actions and the first action was disrupted, you
lose all 3 actions that you committed to that activity.
The GM decides what effects a disruption causes
beyond simply negating the effects that would have
IN-DEPTH ACTION RULES
These rules clarify some of the specifics of using actions.
Simultaneous Actions
You can use only one single action, activity, or free action
that doesn’t have a trigger at a time. You must complete
one before beginning another. For example, the Sudden
Charge activity states you must Stride twice and then
Strike, so you couldn’t use an Interact action to open a door
in the middle of the movement, nor could you perform part
of the move, make your attack, and then finish the move.
Free actions with triggers and reactions work differently.
You can use these whenever the trigger occurs, even if the
trigger occurs in the middle of another action.
Subordinate Actions
An action might allow you to use a simpler action—usually
one of the Basic Actions on page 469—in a different
circumstance or with different effects. This subordinate
action still has its normal traits and effects, but is modified
in any ways listed in the larger action. For example, an
activity that tells you to Stride up to half your Speed
alters the normal distance you can move in a Stride. The
Stride would still have the move trait, would still trigger
reactions that occur based on movement, and so on. The
subordinate action doesn’t gain any of the traits of the
larger action unless specified. The action that allows you to
use a subordinate action doesn’t require you to spend more
actions or reactions to do so; that cost is already factored in.
Using an activity is not the same as using any of its
subordinate actions. For example, the quickened condition
you get from the haste spell lets you spend an extra action
each turn to Stride or Strike, but you couldn’t use the extra
action for an activity that includes a Stride or Strike. As
another example, if you used an action that specified, “If the
next action you use is a Strike,” an activity that includes a
Strike wouldn’t count, because the next thing you are doing
is starting an activity, not using the Strike basic action.
Core Rulebook
462
occurred from the disrupted action. For instance, a Leap
disrupted midway wouldn’t transport you back to the
start of your jump, and a disrupted item hand off might
cause the item to fall to the ground instead of staying in
the hand of the creature who was trying to give it away.
Movement
Your movement and position determine how you can
interact with the world. Moving around in exploration
and downtime modes is relatively fluid and free form.
Movement in encounter mode, by contrast, is governed
by rules explained in Movement in Encounters (page
473). The rules below apply regardless of which mode
you’re playing in.
Movement Types
Creatures in Pathfinder soar through the clouds, scale
sheer cliffs, and tunnel underfoot. Most creatures have
a Speed, which is how fast they can move across the
ground. Some abilities give you different ways to move,
such as through the air or underground.
Each of these special movement types has its own
Speed value. Many creatures have these Speeds naturally.
The various types of movement are listed below. Since the
Stride action can be used only with your normal Speed,
moving using one of these movement types requires using
a special action, and you can’t Step while using one of
these movement types. Since Speed by itself refers to your
land Speed, rules text concerning these special movement
types specifies the movement types to which it applies.
Even though Speeds aren’t checks, they can have item,
circumstance, and status bonuses and penalties. These can’t
reduce your Speeds below 5 feet unless stated otherwise.
Switching from one movement type to another requires
ending your action that has the first movement type and
using a new action that has the second movement type.
For instance, if you Climbed 10 feet to the top of a cliff,
you could then Stride forward 10 feet.
Speed
Most characters and monsters have a speed statistic—
also called land Speed—which indicates how quickly
they can move across the ground. When you use the
Stride action, you move a number of feet equal to your
Speed. Numerous other abilities also allow you to move,
from Crawling to Leaping, and most of them are based
on your Speed in some way. Whenever a rule mentions
your Speed without specifying a type, it’s referring to
your land Speed.
Burrow Speed
A burrow Speed lets you tunnel through the ground.
You can use the Burrow action (page 472) if you have
a burrow Speed. Burrowing doesn’t normally leave
behind a tunnel unless the ability specifically states that
it does. Most creatures need to hold their breath when
burrowing, and they may need tremorsense (page 465) to
navigate with any accuracy.
Climb Speed
A climb Speed allows you to move up or down inclines and
vertical surfaces. Instead of needing to attempt Athletics
checks to Climb, you automatically succeed and move up
to your climb Speed instead of the listed distance.
You might still have to attempt Athletics checks to
Climb in hazardous conditions, to Climb extremely
difficult surfaces, or to cross horizontal planes such as
ceilings. You can also choose to roll an Athletics check to
Climb rather than accept an automatic success in hopes
of getting a critical success. Your climb Speed grants you
a +4 circumstance bonus to Athletics checks to Climb.
If you have a climb Speed, you’re not flat-footed
while climbing.
Fly Speed
As long as you have a fly Speed, you can use the Fly
and Arrest a Fall actions (page 472). You can also
attempt to Maneuver in Flight if you’re trained in the
Acrobatics skill.
Wind conditions can affect how you use the Fly action.
In general, moving against the wind uses the same rules
as moving through difficult terrain (or greater difficult
terrain, if you’re also flying upward), and moving with
the wind allows you to move 10 feet for every 5 feet
of movement you spend (not cumulative with moving
straight downward). For more information on spending
movement, see Movement in Encounters on page 473.
Upward and downward movement are both relative
to the gravity in your area; if you’re in a place with
zero gravity, moving up or down is no different from
moving horizontally.
Swim Speed
With a swim Speed, you can propel yourself through
the water with little impediment. Instead of attempting
Athletics checks to Swim, you automatically succeed and
move up to your swim Speed instead of the listed distance.
Moving up or down is still moving through difficult terrain.
You might still have to attempt checks to Swim in
hazardous conditions or to cross turbulent water. You can
also choose to roll an Athletics check to Swim rather than
accept an automatic success in hopes of getting a critical
success. Your swim Speed grants you a +4 circumstance
bonus to Athletics checks to Swim.
Having a swim Speed doesn’t necessarily mean you
can breathe in water, so you might still have to hold your
breath if you’re underwater to avoid drowning (page 478).
Falling
When you fall more than 5 feet, you take bludgeoning
damage equal to half the distance you fell when you
463
PLAYING THE GAME 9
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
land. Treat falls longer than 1,500 feet as though they
were 1,500 feet (750 damage). If you take any damage
from a fall, you land prone. You fall about 500 feet
in the first round of falling and about 1,500 feet each
round thereafter.
You can Grab an Edge as a reaction to reduce the
damage from some falls. In addition, if you fall into
water, snow, or another relatively soft substance, you
can treat the fall as though it were 20 feet shorter, or 30
feet shorter if you intentionally dove in. The effective
reduction can’t be greater than the depth (so when
falling into 10-foot-deep water, you treat the fall as 10
feet shorter).
Falling on a Creature
If you land on a creature, that creature must attempt a
DC 15 Reflex save. Landing exactly on a creature after a
long fall is almost impossible.
Critical Success The creature takes no damage.
Success The creature takes bludgeoning damage equal to
one-quarter the falling damage you took.
Failure The creature takes bludgeoning damage equal to half
the falling damage you took.
Critical Failure The creature takes the same amount of
bludgeoning damage you took from the fall.
Falling Objects
A dropped object takes damage just like a falling
creature. If the object lands on a creature, that creature
can attempt a Reflex save using the same rules as for a
creature falling on a creature. Hazards and spells that
involve falling objects, such as a rock slide, have their
own rules about how they interact with creatures and
the damage they deal.
Perception
Your Perception measures your ability to notice things,
search for what’s hidden, and tell whether something
about a situation is suspicious. This statistic is
frequently used for rolling initiative to determine who
goes first in an encounter, and it’s also used for the
Seek action.
The rules for rolling a Perception check are found
on page 448. The rules below describe the effects of
light and visibility on your specific senses to perceive
the world, as well as the rules for sensing and locating
creatures with Perception.
Light
The amount of light in an area can affect how well you
see things. There are three levels of light: bright light,
dim light, and darkness. The rules in this book assume
that all creatures are in bright light unless otherwise
noted. A source of light lists the radius in which it sheds
bright light, and it sheds dim light to double that radius.
Bright Light
In bright light, such as sunlight, creatures and objects
can be observed clearly by anyone with average vision
or better. Some types of creatures are dazzled or blinded
by bright light.
Dim Light
Areas in shadow or lit by weak light sources are in
dim light. Creatures and objects in dim light have the
concealed condition, unless the seeker has darkvision or
low-light vision (see Special Senses on page 465), or a
precise sense other than vision.
Darkness
A creature or object within darkness is hidden or
undetected unless the seeker has darkvision or a precise
sense other than vision (Special Senses are on page 465).
A creature without darkvision or another means of
perceiving in darkness has the blinded condition while
in darkness, though it might be able to see illuminated
areas beyond the darkness. If a creature can see into
an illuminated area, it can observe creatures within
that illuminated area normally. After being in darkness,
sudden exposure to bright light might make you dazzled
for a short time, as determined by the GM.
Senses
The ways a creature can use Perception depend on what
senses it has. The primary concepts you need to know
for understanding senses are precise senses, imprecise
senses, and the three states of detection a target can be
in: observed, hidden, or undetected. Vision, hearing, and
scent are three prominent senses, but they don’t have the
same degree of acuity.
Precise Senses
Average vision is a precise sense—a sense that can be
used to perceive the world in nuanced detail. The only
way to target a creature without having drawbacks is
to use a precise sense. You can usually detect a creature
automatically with a precise sense unless that creature is
hiding or obscured by the environment, in which case you
can use the Seek basic action to better detect the creature.
Imprecise Senses
Hearing is an imprecise sense—it cannot detect the full
range of detail that a precise sense can. You can usually
sense a creature automatically with an imprecise sense,
but it has the hidden condition instead of the observed
condition. It might be undetected by you if it’s using
Stealth or is in an environment that distorts the sense,
such as a noisy room in the case of hearing. In those
cases, you have to use the Seek basic action to detect the
creature. At best, an imprecise sense can be used to make
an undetected creature (or one you didn’t even know was
there) merely hidden—it can’t make the creature observed.
Core Rulebook
464
Vague Senses
A character also has many vague senses—ones that can
alert you that something is there but aren’t useful for
zeroing in on it to determine exactly what it is. The
most useful of these for a typical character is the sense
of smell. At best, a vague sense can be used to detect the
presence of an unnoticed creature, making it undetected.
Even then, the vague sense isn’t sufficient to make the
creature hidden or observed.
When one creature might detect another, the GM
almost always uses the most precise sense available.
Pathfinder’s rules assume that a given creature has
vision as its only precise sense and hearing as its only
imprecise sense. Some characters and creatures, however,
have precise or imprecise senses that don’t match this
assumption. For instance, a character with poor vision
might treat that sense as imprecise, an animal with the
scent ability can use its sense of smell as an imprecise
sense, and a creature with echolocation or a similar
ability can use hearing as a precise sense. Such senses are
often given special names and appear as “echolocation
(precise),” “scent (imprecise) 30 feet,” or the like.
Special Senses
While a human might have a difficult time making
creatures out in dim light, an elf can see those creatures
just fine. And though elves have no problem seeing on
a moonlit night, their vision cannot penetrate complete
darkness, whereas a dwarf’s can.
Special senses grant greater awareness that allows
a creature with these senses to either ignore or reduce
the effects of the undetected, hidden, or concealed
conditions (described in Detecting Creatures below)
when it comes to situations that foil average vision. The
following are a few examples of common special senses.
Darkvision and Greater Darkvision
A creature with darkvision or greater darkvision can
see perfectly well in areas of darkness and dim light,
though such vision is in black and white only. Some
forms of magical darkness, such as a 4th-level darkness
spell, block normal darkvision. A creature with greater
darkvision, however, can see through even these forms
of magical darkness.
Low-Light Vision
A creature with low-light vision can see in dim light as
though it were bright light, so it ignores the concealed
condition due to dim light.
Scent
Scent involves sensing creatures or objects by smell, and is
usually a vague sense. The range is listed in the ability, and
it functions only if the creature or object being detected
emits an aroma (for instance, incorporeal creatures usually
do not exude an aroma).
If a creature emits a heavy aroma or is upwind, the GM
can double or even triple the range of scent abilities used
to detect that creature, and the GM can reduce the range
if a creature is downwind.
Tremorsense
Tremorsense allows a creature to feel the vibrations
through a solid surface caused by movement. It is usually
an imprecise sense with a limited range (listed in the ability).
Tremorsense functions only if the detecting creature is on
the same surface as the subject, and only if the subject is
moving along (or burrowing through) the surface.
Detecting Creatures
There are three conditions that measure the degree
to which you can sense a creature: observed, hidden,
and undetected. However, the concealed and invisible
conditions can partially mask a creature, and the
unnoticed condition indicates you have no idea a creature
is around. In addition to the descriptions here, you can
find these conditions in the Conditions Appendix on
pages 618–623.
With the exception of invisible, these conditions are
relative to the viewer—it’s possible for a creature to be
observed to you but hidden from your ally. When you’re
trying to target a creature that’s hard to see or otherwise
sense, various drawbacks apply. Most of these rules apply
to objects you’re trying to detect as well as creatures.
DETECTING WITH OTHER SENSES
If a monster uses a sense other than vision, the GM can
adapt the variables that keep its foes from being detected
to equivalents that work with the monster’s senses. For
example, a creature that has echolocation might use
hearing as a primary sense. This could mean its quarry is
concealed in a noisy chamber, hidden in a great enough
din, or even invisible in the area of a silence spell.
Using Stealth with Other Senses
The Stealth skill is designed to use Hide for avoiding
visual detection and Avoid Notice and Sneak to avoid
being both seen and heard. For many special senses, a
player can describe how they’re avoiding detection by
that special sense and use the most applicable Stealth
action. For instance, a creature stepping lightly to avoid
being detected via tremorsense would be using Sneak.
In some cases, rolling a Dexterity-based Stealth
skill check to Sneak doesn’t make the most sense.
For example, when facing a creature that can detect
heartbeats, a PC trying to avoid being detected might
meditate to slow their heart rate, using Wisdom instead
of Dexterity as the ability modifier for the Stealth check.
When a creature that can detect you has multiple senses,
such as if it could also hear or see, the PC would use the
lowest applicable ability modifier for the check.
465
PLAYING THE GAME 9
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Typically, the GM tracks how well creatures detect each
other, since neither party has perfect information. For
example, you might think a creature is in the last place you
sensed it, but it was able to Sneak away. Or you might think
a creature can’t see you in the dark, but it has darkvision.
You can attempt to avoid detection by using the Stealth
skill (page 251) to Avoid Notice, Hide, or Sneak, or by
using Deception to Create a Diversion (page 245).
Observed
In most circumstances, you can sense creatures without
difficulty and target them normally. Creatures in this state
are observed. Observing requires a precise sense, which
for most creatures means sight, but see the Detecting with
Other Senses sidebar (page 465) for advice regarding
creatures that don’t use sight as their primary sense. If you
can’t observe the creature, it’s either hidden, undetected,
or unnoticed, and you’ll need to factor in the targeting
restrictions. Even if a creature is observed, it might still
be concealed.
Hidden
A creature that’s hidden is only barely perceptible. You
know what space a hidden creature occupies, but little
else. Perhaps the creature just moved behind cover and
successfully used the Hide action. Your target might be in
a deep fogbank or behind a waterfall, where you can see
some movement but can’t determine an exact location.
Maybe you’ve been blinded or the creature is under
the effects of invisibility, but you used the Seek basic
action to determine its general location based on hearing
alone. Regardless of the specifics, you’re flat-footed to a
hidden creature.
When targeting a hidden creature, before you roll to
determine your effect, you must attempt a DC  11 flat
check. If you fail, you don’t affect the creature, though the
actions you used are still expended—as well as any spell
slots, costs, and other resources. You remain flat-footed to
the creature, whether you successfully target it or not.
Undetected
If a creature is undetected, you don’t know what space
it occupies, you’re flat-footed to it, and you can’t easily
target it. Using the Seek basic action can help you find
an undetected creature, usually making it hidden from
you instead of undetected. If a creature is undetected,
that doesn’t necessarily mean you’re unaware of its
presence—you might suspect an undetected creature is in
the room with you, even though you’re unable to find its
space. The unnoticed condition covers creatures you’re
entirely unaware of.
Targeting an undetected creature is difficult. If you
suspect there’s a creature around, you can pick a square
and attempt an attack. This works like targeting a
hidden creature, but the flat check and attack roll are
both rolled in secret by the GM. The GM won’t tell you
why you missed—whether it was due to failing the flat
check, rolling an insufficient attack roll, or choosing the
Core Rulebook
466
wrong square. The GM might allow you to try targeting
an undetected creature with some spells or other abilities
in a similar fashion. Undetected creatures are subject to
area effects normally.
For instance, suppose an enemy elf wizard cast
invisibility and then Sneaked away. You suspect that with
the elf’s Speed of 30 feet, they probably moved 15 feet
toward an open door. You move up and attack a space 15
feet from where the elf started and directly on the path
to the door. The GM secretly rolls an attack roll and flat
check, but they know that you were not quite correct—
the elf was actually in the adjacent space! The GM tells
you that you missed, so you decide to make your next
attack on the adjacent space, just in case. This time, it’s
the right space, and the GM’s secret attack roll and flat
check both succeed, so you hit!
Unnoticed
If you have no idea a creature is even present, that
creature is unnoticed by you. A creature that is undetected
might also be unnoticed. This condition usually matters
for abilities that can be used only against targets totally
unaware of your presence.
Concealment and Invisibility
The concealed and invisible conditions reflect certain
circumstances that can make a creature harder to see.
Concealed
This condition protects a creature if it’s in mist, within
dim light, or amid something else that obscures sight but
does not provide a physical barrier to effects. An effect
or type of terrain that describes an area of concealment
makes all creatures within it concealed.
When you target a creature that’s concealed from you,
you must attempt a DC 5 flat check before you roll to
determine your effect. If you fail, you don’t affect the
target. The concealed condition doesn’t change which of
the main categories of detection apply to the creature. A
creature in a light fog bank is still observed even though
it’s concealed.
Invisible
A creature with the invisible condition (by way of an
invisibility spell or invisibility potion, for example) is
automatically undetected to any creatures relying on
sight as their only precise sense. Precise senses other than
sight ignore the invisible condition.
You can use the Seek basic action to attempt to figure
out an invisible creature’s location, making it instead only
hidden from you. This lasts until the invisible creature
successfully uses Sneak to become undetected again. If
you’re already observing a creature when it becomes
invisible, it starts out hidden, since you know where it
was when it became invisible, though it can then Sneak to
become undetected.
Other effects might make an invisible creature
hidden or even observed but concealed. For instance,
if you were tracking an invisible creature’s footprints
through the snow, the footprints would make it hidden.
Similarly, throwing a net over an invisible creature
would make it observed but concealed for as long as
the net is on the creature.
Hero Points
Your heroic deeds earn you Hero Points, which grant
you good fortune or let you recover from the brink of
death. Unlike most aspects of your character, which
persist over the long term, Hero Points last for only a
single session.
The GM is in charge of awarding Hero Points
(guidelines for doing so can be found on page 507).
Usually, each character gets 1 Hero Point at the start of
a session and can gain more later by performing heroic
deeds—something selfless, daring, or beyond normal
expectations. You can have a maximum of 3 Hero Points
at a time, and you lose any remaining Hero Points at the
end of a session.
You can spend your Hero Points in one of two ways.
Neither of these is an action, and you can spend Hero
Points even if you aren’t able to act. You can spend a Hero
Point on behalf of your familiar or animal companion.
• Spend 1 Hero Point to reroll a check. You must use
the second result. This is a fortune effect (which
means you can’t use more than 1 Hero Point on
a check).
• Spend all your Hero Points (minimum 1) to avoid
death. You can do this when your dying condition
would increase. You lose the dying condition
entirely and stabilize with 0 Hit Points. You don’t
gain the wounded condition or increase its value
from losing the dying condition in this way, but if
you already had that condition, you don’t lose it
or decrease its value.
Describing Heroic Deeds
Because spending Hero Points reflects heroic deeds or
tasks that surpass normal expectations, if you spend a
Hero Point, you should describe the deed or task your
character accomplishes with it to the other players.
Your character’s deed might invoke a lesson learned
in a past adventure, could be spurred by a determination
to save someone else, or might depend on an item that
ended up on their person due to a previous exploit. If you
don’t want to describe the deed or don’t have any strong
ideas about how to do so, ask the GM to come up with
something for you. This can be a collaborative process,
too. The GM might remind you of a long-forgotten
event in the campaign, and all you have to do is fill in
how that event comes to mind just at the right time,
motivating you to push past your limits.
467
PLAYING THE GAME 9
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Structure
An encounter is played out in a series of rounds,
during which the player characters, adversaries, and
other participants in the encounter act in sequence.
You roll initiative to determine this order at the start
of the encounter and then play through rounds until a
conclusion is reached and the encounter ends. The rules
in this section assume a combat encounter—a battle—but
the general structure can apply to any kind of encounter.
Step 1: Roll Initiative
When the GM calls for it, you’ll roll initiative to
determine your place in the initiative order, which is
the sequence in which the encounter’s participants will
take their turns. Rolling initiative marks the start of an
encounter. More often than not, you’ll roll initiative
when you enter a battle.
Typically, you’ll roll a Perception check to determine your
initiative—the more aware you are of your surroundings,
the more quickly you can respond. Sometimes, though, the
GM might call on you to roll some other type of check. For
instance, if you were Avoiding Notice during exploration
(page 479), you’d roll a Stealth check. A social encounter
could call for a Deception or Diplomacy check.
The GM rolls initiative for anyone other than the player
characters in the encounter. If these include a number of
identical creatures, the GM could roll once for the group
as a whole and have them take their turns within the
group in any order. However, this can make battles less
predictable and more dangerous, so the GM might want to
roll initiative for some or all creatures individually unless
it’s too much of a burden.
Unlike a typical check, where the result is compared to a
DC, the results of initiative rolls are ranked. This ranking
sets the order in which the encounter’s participants act—
the initiative order. The character with the highest result
goes first. The second highest follows, and so on until
whoever had the lowest result takes their turn last.
If your result is tied with a foe’s result, the adversary goes
first. If your result is tied with another PC’s, you can decide
between yourselves who goes first when you reach that
place in the initiative order. After that, your places in the
initiative order usually don’t change during the encounter.
Step 2: Play a Round
A round begins when the participant with the highest
initiative roll result starts their turn, and it ends when the
one with the lowest initiative ends their turn. The process
of taking a turn is detailed below. Creatures might also act
outside their turns with reactions and free actions.
Step 3: Begin the Next Round
Once everyone in the encounter has taken a turn, the
round is over and the next one begins. Don’t roll initiative
again; the new round proceeds in the same order as the
previous one, repeating the cycle until the encounter ends.
Step 4: End the Encounter
When your foes are defeated, some sort of truce is reached,
or some other event or circumstance ends the combat,
the encounter is over. You and the other participants no
longer follow the initiative order, and a more free-form
style of play resumes, with the game typically moving into
exploration mode. Sometimes at the end of an encounter,
the GM will award Experience Points to the party or
you’ll find treasure to divvy up.
Turns
When it’s your turn to act, you can use single actions ([one-action]),
short activities ([two-actions] and [three-actions]), reactions ([reaction]), and free
actions ([free-action]). When you’re finished, your turn ends and
the character next in the initiative order begins their turn.
Sometimes it’s important to note when during your turn
something happens, so a turn is divided into three steps.
Step 1: Start Your Turn
Many things happen automatically at the start of your
turn— it’s a common point for tracking the passage of time
for effects that last multiple rounds. At the start of each of
your turns, take these steps in any order you choose:
• If you created an effect lasting for a certain
number of rounds, reduce the number of rounds
remaining by 1. The effect ends if the duration is
reduced to 0. For example, if you cast a spell that
lasts 3 rounds on yourself during your first turn
of a fight, it would affect you during that turn,
decrease to 2 rounds of duration at the start of
your second turn, decrease to 1 round of duration
at the start of your third turn, and expire at the
start of your fourth turn.
• You can use 1 free action or reaction with a trigger
of “Your turn begins” or something similar.
• If you’re dying, roll a recovery check (page 459).
Encounter Mode
When every individual action counts, you enter the encounter mode of play. In this mode,
time is divided into rounds, each of which is 6 seconds of time in the game world. Every
round, each participant takes a turn in an established order. During your turn, you can use
actions, and depending on the details of the encounter, you might have the opportunity to
use reactions and free actions on your own turn and on others’ turns.
Core Rulebook
468
• Do anything else that is specified to happen at the
start of your turn.
The last step of starting your turn is always the same.
• Regain your 3 actions and 1 reaction. If you haven’t
spent your reaction from your last turn, you lose
it—you can’t “save” actions or reactions from one
turn to use during the next turn. If a condition
prevents you from being able to act, you don’t
regain any actions or your reaction. Some abilities
or conditions (such as quickened and slowed) can
change how many actions you regain and whether
you regain your reaction. If you lose actions and gain
additional actions (such as if you’re both quickened
and slowed), you choose which actions to lose.
Step 2: Act
You can use actions in any order you wish during your
turn, but you have to complete one action or activity before
beginning another; for example, you can’t use a single
action in the middle of performing a 2-action activity. What
actions you can use often depend on your class features,
skills, feats, and items, but there are default actions anyone
can use, described in Basic Actions below. Some effects
might prevent you from acting. If you can’t act, you can’t
use any actions, including reactions and free actions.
If you begin a 2-action or 3-action activity on your turn,
you must be able to complete it on your turn. You can’t,
for example, begin to High Jump using your final action
on one turn and then complete it as your first action on
your next turn.
Once you have spent all 3 of your actions, your turn
ends (as described in Step 3) and the next creature’s turn
begins. You can, however, use only some of your actions
and end your turn early. As soon as your turn ends, you
lose all your remaining actions, but not your reaction or
your ability to use free actions.
Step 3: End Your Turn
Once you’ve done all the things you want to do with the
actions you have available, you reach the end of your turn.
Take the following steps in any order you choose. Play
then proceeds to the next creature in the initiative order.
• End any effects that last until the end of your turn.
For example, spells with a sustained duration end at
the end of your turn unless you used the Sustain a
Spell action during your turn to extend them. Some
effects caused by enemies might also last through a
certain number of your turns, and you decrease the
remaining duration by 1 during this step, ending
the effect if its duration is reduced to 0.
• If you have a persistent damage condition, you
take the damage at this point. After you take
the damage, you can attempt the flat check to
end the persistent damage. You then attempt
any saving throws for ongoing afflictions. Many
other conditions change at the end of your turn,
such as the frightened condition decreasing in
severity. These take place after you’ve taken any
persistent damage, attempted flat checks to end
the persistent damage, and attempted saves against
any afflictions.
• You can use 1 free action or reaction with a trigger
of “Your turn ends” or something similar.
• Resolve anything else specified to happen at the end
of your turn.
Basic Actions
Basic actions represent common tasks like moving around,
attacking, and helping others. As such, every creature can
use basic actions except in some extreme circumstances,
and many of those actions are used very frequently. Most
notably, you’ll use Interact, Step, Stride, and Strike a great
deal. Many feats and other actions call upon you to use
one of these basic actions or modify them to produce
different effects. For example, a more complex action
might let you Stride up to double your Speed instead of
just up to your Speed, and a large number of activities
include a Strike.
Actions that are used less frequently but are still
available to most creatures are presented in Specialty
Basic Actions starting on page 472. These typically have
requirements that not all characters are likely to meet,
such as wielding a shield or having a burrow Speed.
In addition to the actions in these two sections, the
actions for spellcasting can be found on pages 302–305,
and the actions for using magic items appear on pages
531–534.
TRACKING INITIATIVE
The GM keeps track of the initiative order for an encounter.
It’s usually okay for the players to know this order, since
they’ll see who goes when and be aware of one another’s
results. However, the GM might want to conceal the
names of adversaries the PCs have yet to identify.
Once the encounter’s order is set, it’s usually not
necessary to track the original initiative numbers. The
GM can create a simple list, use a series of cards or other
indicators, or use a Pathfinder Combat Pad, which has
magnetic markers to allow for easily rearranging the order.
Changing the Initiative Order
Any method used to track the initiative order needs to be
flexible because the order can change. A creature can use the
Delay basic action to change its place in the order, in which
case you can erase it from the list or pull its marker aside
until it reenters the initiative order. When a creature gets
knocked out, its initiative order also changes (see Knocked
Out and Dying on page 459). Using the Ready basic action
doesn’t change a creature’s place in the initiative order,
though, because the designated action becomes a reaction.
469
PLAYING THE GAME 9
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
AID [reaction]
Trigger An ally is about to use an action that requires a skill
check or attack roll.
Requirements The ally is willing to accept your aid, and you
have prepared to help (see below).
You try to help your ally with a task. To use this reaction, you
must first prepare to help, usually by using an action during
your turn. You must explain to the GM exactly how you’re trying
to help, and they determine whether you can Aid your ally.
When you use your Aid reaction, attempt a skill check or
attack roll of a type decided by the GM. The typical DC is 20, but
the GM might adjust this DC for particularly hard or easy tasks.
The GM can add any relevant traits to your preparatory action
or to your Aid reaction depending on the situation, or even allow
you to Aid checks other than skill checks and attack rolls.
Critical Success You grant your ally a +2 circumstance bonus to
the triggering check. If you’re a master with the check you
attempted, the bonus is +3, and if you’re legendary, it’s +4.
Success You grant your ally a +1 circumstance bonus to the
triggering check.
Critical Failure Your ally takes a –1 circumstance penalty to the
triggering check.
CRAWL [one-action]
MOVE
Requirements You are prone and your Speed is at least 10 feet.
You move 5 feet by crawling and continue to stay prone.
DELAY [free-action]
Trigger Your turn begins.
You wait for the right moment to act. The rest of your turn doesn’t
happen yet. Instead, you’re removed from the initiative order.
You can return to the initiative order as a free action triggered by
the end of any other creature’s turn. This permanently changes
your initiative to the new position. You can’t use reactions until
you return to the initiative order. If you Delay an entire round
without returning to the initiative order, the actions from the
Delayed turn are lost, your initiative doesn’t change, and your
next turn occurs at your original position in the initiative order.
When you Delay, any persistent damage or other negative
effects that normally occur at the start or end of your turn occur
immediately when you use the Delay action. Any beneficial
effects that would end at any point during your turn also end.
The GM might determine that other effects end when you
Delay as well. Essentially, you can’t Delay to avoid negative
consequences that would happen on your turn or to extend
beneficial effects that would end on your turn.
DROP PRONE [one-action]
MOVE
You fall prone.
ESCAPE [one-action]
ATTACK
You attempt to escape from being grabbed, immobilized,
or restrained. Choose one creature, object, spell effect, hazard,
or other impediment imposing any of those conditions on you.
Attempt a check using your unarmed attack modifier against
the DC of the effect. This is typically the Athletics DC of a
creature grabbing you, the Thievery DC of a creature who tied
you up, the spell DC for a spell effect, or the listed Escape DC
of an object, hazard, or other impediment. You can attempt
an Acrobatics or Athletics check instead of using your attack
modifier if you choose (but this action still has the attack trait).
Critical Success You get free and remove the grabbed,
immobilized, and restrained conditions imposed by your
chosen target. You can then Stride up to 5 feet.
Success You get free and remove the grabbed, immobilized,
and restrained conditions imposed by your chosen target.
Critical Failure You don’t get free, and you can’t attempt to
Escape again until your next turn.
INTERACT [one-action]
MANIPULATE
You use your hand or hands to manipulate an object or the
terrain. You can grab an unattended or stored object, open a
door, or produce some similar effect. You might have to attempt
a skill check to determine if your Interact action was successful.
LEAP [one-action]
MOVE
You take a careful, short jump. You can Leap up to 10 feet
horizontally if your Speed is at least 15 feet, or up to 15 feet
horizontally if your Speed is at least 30 feet. You land in the
space where your Leap ends (meaning you can typically clear
a 5-foot gap, or a 10-foot gap if your Speed is 30 feet or more).
If you Leap vertically, you can move up to 3 feet vertically
and 5 feet horizontally onto an elevated surface.
Jumping a greater distance requires using the Athletics skill.
READY [two-actions]
CONCENTRATE
You prepare to use an action that will occur outside your
turn. Choose a single action or free action you can use, and
designate a trigger. Your turn then ends. If the trigger you
designated occurs before the start of your next turn, you can
use the chosen action as a reaction (provided you still meet
the requirements to use it). You can’t Ready a free action that
already has a trigger.
If you have a multiple attack penalty and your readied action
is an attack action, your readied attack takes the multiple
attack penalty you had at the time you used Ready. This is one
of the few times the multiple attack penalty applies when it’s
not your turn.
RELEASE [free-action]
MANIPULATE
You release something you’re holding in your hand or hands.
This might mean dropping an item, removing one hand from
your weapon while continuing to hold it in another hand,
releasing a rope suspending a chandelier, or performing a
similar action. Unlike most manipulate actions, Release does
Core Rulebook
470
SPEAKING
As long as you can act, you can also speak. You don’t
need to spend any type of action to speak, but because a
round represents 6 seconds of time, you can usually speak
at most a single sentence or so per round. Special uses
of speech, such as attempting a Deception skill check to
Lie, require spending actions and follow their own rules.
All speech has the auditory trait. If you communicate in
some way other than speech, other rules might apply. For
instance, using sign language is visual instead of auditory.
not trigger reactions that can be triggered by actions with the
manipulate trait (such as Attack of Opportunity).
If you want to prepare to Release something outside of your
turn, use the Ready activity.
SEEK [one-action]
CONCENTRATE SECRET
You scan an area for signs of creatures or objects. If you’re
looking for creatures, choose an area you’re scanning. If
precision is necessary, the GM can have you select a 30-foot
cone or a 15-foot burst within line of sight. You might take a
penalty if you choose an area that’s far away.
If you’re using Seek to search for objects (including secret
doors and hazards), you search up to a 10-foot square adjacent
to you. The GM might determine you need to Seek as an
activity, taking more actions or even minutes or hours if you’re
searching a particularly cluttered area.
The GM attempts a single secret Perception check for you
and compares the result to the Stealth DCs of any undetected
or hidden creatures in the area or the DC to detect each
object in the area (as determined by the GM or by someone
Concealing the Object). A creature you detect might remain
hidden, rather than becoming observed, if you’re using an
imprecise sense or if an effect (such as invisibility) prevents
the subject from being observed.
Critical Success If you were searching for creatures, any
undetected or hidden creature you critically succeeded
against becomes observed by you. If you were searching
for an object, you learn its location.
Success If you were searching for creatures, any undetected
creature you succeeded against becomes hidden from
you instead of undetected, and any hidden creature you
succeeded against becomes observed by you. If you were
searching for an object, you learn its location or get a clue
to its whereabouts, as determined by the GM.
SENSE MOTIVE [one-action]
CONCENTRATE SECRET
You try to tell whether a creature’s behavior is abnormal.
Choose one creature, and assess it for odd body language,
signs of nervousness, and other indicators that it might be
trying to deceive someone. The GM attempts a single secret
Perception check for you and compares the result to the
Deception DC of the creature, the DC of a spell affecting the
creature’s mental state, or another appropriate DC determined
by the GM. You typically can’t try to Sense the Motive of the
same creature again until the situation changes significantly.
Critical Success You determine the creature’s true intentions
and get a solid idea of any mental magic affecting it.
Success You can tell whether the creature is behaving normally,
but you don’t know its exact intentions or what magic might
be affecting it.
Failure You detect what a deceptive creature wants you to
believe. If they’re not being deceptive, you believe they’re
behaving normally.
Critical Failure You get a false sense of the creature’s intentions.
STAND [one-action]
MOVE
You stand up from prone.
STEP [one-action]
MOVE
Requirements Your Speed is at least 10 feet.
You carefully move 5 feet. Unlike most types of movement,
Stepping doesn’t trigger reactions, such as Attacks of Opportunity,
that can be triggered by move actions or upon leaving or entering
a square.
You can’t Step into difficult terrain (page 475), and you can’t
Step using a Speed other than your land Speed.
STRIDE [one-action]
MOVE
You move up to your Speed (page 463).
STRIKE [one-action]
ATTACK
You attack with a weapon you’re wielding or with an unarmed
attack, targeting one creature within your reach (for a
melee  attack) or within range (for a ranged attack). Roll the
attack roll for the weapon or unarmed attack you are using, and
compare the result to the target creature’s AC to determine the
effect. See Attack Rolls on page 446 and Damage on page 450
for details on calculating your attack and damage rolls.
Critical Success As success, but you deal double damage (page 451).
Success You deal damage according to the weapon or unarmed
attack, including any modifiers, bonuses, and penalties you
have to damage.
TAKE COVER [one-action]
Requirements You are benefiting from cover, are near a feature
that allows you to take cover, or are prone.
You press yourself against a wall or duck behind an obstacle
to take better advantage of cover (page 477). If you would
have standard cover, you instead gain greater cover, which
provides a +4 circumstance bonus to AC; to Reflex saves
against area effects; and to Stealth checks to Hide, Sneak, or
otherwise avoid detection. Otherwise, you gain the benefits of
standard cover (a +2 circumstance bonus instead). This lasts
until you move from your current space, use an attack action,
become unconscious, or end this effect as a free action.
471
PLAYING THE GAME 9
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Specialty Basic Actions
These actions are useful under specific circumstances. Some
require you to have a special movement type (page 463).
ARREST A FALL [reaction]
Trigger You fall.
Requirements You have a fly Speed.
You attempt an Acrobatics check to slow your fall. The DC is
typically 15, but it might be higher due to air turbulence or
other circumstances.
Success You fall gently, taking no damage from the fall.
AVERT GAZE [one-action]
You avert your gaze from danger. You gain a +2 circumstance
bonus to saves against visual abilities that require you to look
at a creature or object, such as a medusa’s petrifying gaze. Your
gaze remains averted until the start of your next turn.
BURROW [one-action]
MOVE
Requirements You have a burrow Speed.
You dig your way through dirt, sand, or a similar loose material
at a rate up to your burrow Speed. You can’t burrow through
rock or other substances denser than dirt unless you have an
ability that allows you to do so.
FLY [one-action]
MOVE
Requirements You have a fly Speed.
You move through the air up to your fly Speed. Moving
upward (straight up or diagonally) uses the rules for moving
through difficult terrain. You can move straight down 10 feet
for every 5 feet of movement you spend. If you Fly to the
ground, you don’t take falling damage. You can use an action
to Fly 0 feet to hover in place. If you’re airborne at the end of
your turn and didn’t use a Fly action this round, you fall.
GRAB AN EDGE [reaction]
MANIPULATE
Trigger You fall from or past an edge or handhold.
Requirements Your hands are not tied behind your back or
otherwise restrained.
When you fall off or past an edge or other handhold, you can
try to grab it, potentially stopping your fall. You must succeed
at a Reflex save, usually at the Climb DC. If you grab the edge
or handhold, you can then Climb up using Athletics.
Critical Success You grab the edge or handhold, whether or
not you have a hand free, typically by using a suitable held
item to catch yourself (catching a battle axe on a ledge, for
example). You still take damage from the distance fallen so
far, but you treat the fall as though it were 30 feet shorter.
Success If you have at least one hand free, you grab the edge
or handhold, stopping your fall. You still take damage from
the distance fallen so far, but you treat the fall as though
it were 20 feet shorter. If you have no hands free, you
continue to fall as if you had failed the check.
Critical Failure You continue to fall, and if you’ve fallen 20 feet
or more before you use this reaction, you take 10 bludgeoning
damage from the impact for every 20 feet fallen.
MOUNT [one-action]
MOVE
Requirements You are adjacent to a creature that is at least
one size larger than you and is willing to be your mount.
You move onto the creature and ride it. If you’re already
mounted, you can instead use this action to dismount, moving
off the mount into a space adjacent to it.
POINT OUT [one-action]
AUDITORY MANIPULATE VISUAL
Requirements A creature is undetected by one or more of your
allies but isn’t undetected by you.
You indicate a creature that you can see to one or more allies,
gesturing in a direction and describing the distance verbally.
That creature is hidden to your allies, rather than undetected
(page 466). This works only for allies who can see you and are
in a position where they could potentially detect the target. If
your allies can’t hear or understand you, they must succeed at
a Perception check against the creature’s Stealth DC or they
misunderstand and believe the target is in a different location.
RAISE A SHIELD [one-action]
Requirements You are wielding a shield.
You position your shield to protect yourself. When you have
Raised a Shield, you gain its listed circumstance bonus to AC.
Your shield remains raised until the start of your next turn.
Activities in Encounters
Activities that take longer than a turn can’t normally be
performed during an encounter. Spells with a casting time
of 1 minute or more are a common example of this, as are
several skill actions. When you commit to an activity during
your turn in an encounter, you commit to spending all of the
actions it requires. If the activity gets interrupted partway
through, you lose all of the actions you would have spent
on that activity. Activities are described in full on page 461.
Reactions in Encounters
Your reactions let you respond immediately to what’s
happening around you. The GM determines whether you
can use reactions before your first turn begins, depending
on the situation in which the encounter happens.
Once your first turn begins, you gain your actions and
reaction. You can use 1 reaction per round. You can use a
reaction on anyone’s turn (including your own), but only
when its trigger occurs. If you don’t use your reaction, you
lose it at the start of your next turn, though you typically
then gain a reaction at the start of that turn.
Some reactions are specifically meant to be used in
combat and can change how the battle plays out drastically.
Core Rulebook
472
One example of such a reaction is Attack of Opportunity,
which fighters gain at 1st level.
ATTACK OF OPPORTUNITY [reaction]
Trigger A creature within your reach uses a manipulate action
or a move action, makes a ranged attack, or leaves a square
during a move action it’s using.
You lash out at a foe that leaves an opening. Make a melee Strike
against the triggering creature. If your attack is a critical hit and
the trigger was a manipulate action, you disrupt that action. This
Strike doesn’t count toward your multiple attack penalty, and
your multiple attack penalty doesn’t apply to this Strike.
This reaction lets you make a melee Strike if a creature
within reach uses a manipulate or move action, makes a
ranged attack, or leaves a square during a move action. The
Triggering Moves diagram on page 474 illustrates examples
of movements that might trigger an Attack of Opportunity
from a creature without reach and one with reach.
You’ll notice this reaction allows you to use a modified
basic action, a Strike. This follows the rules on
subordinate actions found on page 462.
Because your Attack of Opportunity
takes place outside of your turn,
the attack roll doesn’t incur a
multiple attack penalty.
Movement in
Encounters
Your movement during encounter
mode depends on the actions and other
abilities you use. Whether you Stride,
Step, Swim, or Climb, the maximum
distance you can move is based on your
Speed. Certain feats or magic items can grant
you other movement types, allowing you to
swiftly burrow, climb, fly, or swim (page 463).
When the rules refer to a “movement cost” or
“spending movement,” they are describing how
many feet of your Speed you must use to
move from one point to another. Normally,
movement costs 5 feet per square when
you’re moving on a grid, or it costs the
number of feet you move if you’re not
using a grid. However, sometimes it’s harder to move a
certain distance due to difficult terrain (page 475) or other
factors. In such a case, you might have to spend a different
amount of movement to move from one place to another.
For example, a form of movement might require 10 feet
of movement to move 1 square, and moving through some
types of terrain costs an extra 5 feet of movement per square.
Grid Movement
If an encounter involves combat, it’s often a good idea to
track the movement and relative position of the participants
using a Pathfinder Flip-Mat, Flip-Tiles, or some other form
of grid to display the terrain, and miniatures to represent
the combatants. When a character moves on a grid, every
1-inch square of the play area is 5 feet across in the game
world. Hence, a creature moving in a straight line spends 5
feet of its movement for every map square traveled.
Because moving diagonally covers more ground, you
count that movement differently. The first square of
diagonal movement you make in a turn counts as 5 feet,
but the second counts as 10 feet, and your count thereafter
alternates between the two. For example, as you move
across 4 squares diagonally, you would count 5 feet, then
10, then 5, and then 10, for a total of 30 feet. You track your
total diagonal movement across all your movement during
your turn, but reset your count at the end of your turn.
Size, Space, and Reach
Creatures and objects of different sizes occupy
different amounts of space. The sizes and the
spaces they each take up on a grid are listed
in Table 9–1: Size and Reach (page 474).
473
PLAYING THE GAME 9
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Table 9–1 also lists the typical reach for creatures of each
size, for both tall creatures (most bipeds) and long creatures
(most quadrupeds). See page 455 for more about reach.
The Space entry lists how many feet on a side a creature’s
space is, so a Large creature fills a 10-foot-by-10-foot
space (4 squares on the grid). Sometimes part of a creature
extends beyond its space, such as if a giant octopus is
grabbing you with its tentacles. In that case, the GM will
usually allow attacking the extended portion, even if you
can’t reach the main creature. A Small or larger creature or
object takes up at least 1 square on a grid, and creatures
of these sizes can’t usually share spaces except in situations
like a character riding a mount. Rules for moving through
other creatures’ spaces appear below.
TABLE 9–1: SIZE AND REACH
Size Space Reach (Tall) Reach (Long)
Tiny Less than 5 feet 0 feet 0 feet
Small 5 feet 5 feet 5 feet
Medium 5 feet 5 feet 5 feet
Large 10 feet 10 feet 5 feet
Huge 15 feet 15 feet 10 feet
Gargantuan 20 feet or more 20 feet 15 feet
Multiple Tiny creatures can occupy the same square.
At least four can fit in a single square, though the GM
might determine that even more can fit. Tiny creatures can
occupy a space occupied by a larger creature as well, and
if their reach is 0 feet, they must do so in order to attack.
Move Actions That Trigger Reactions
Some reactions and free actions are triggered by a creature
using an action with the move trait. The most notable
example is Attack of Opportunity. Actions with the move
trait can trigger reactions or free actions throughout
the course of the distance traveled. Each time you exit
a square (or move 5 feet if not using a grid) within a
creature’s reach, your movement triggers those reactions
and free actions (although no more than once per move
action for a given reacting creature). If you use a move
action but don’t move out of a square, the trigger instead
happens at the end of that action or ability.
Some actions, such as Step, specifically state they don’t
trigger reactions or free actions based on movement.
Moving Through a Creature’s Space
You can move through the space of a willing creature. If
you want to move through an unwilling creature’s space,
you can Tumble Through that creature’s space using
Acrobatics. You can’t end your turn in a square occupied
by another creature, though you can end a move action
in its square provided that you immediately use another
move action to leave that square. If two creatures end
up in the same square by accident, the GM determines
which one is forced out of the square (or whether one
falls prone).
Prone and Incapacitated Creatures
You can share a space with a prone creature if that
Triggering Moves
1. Valeros can approach position 1
with the Stride action without
triggering reactions.
2. If Valeros approaches this
way to position 2, he triggers
reactions from both the
hobgoblin and the troll. The
troll has a reach of 10 feet,
so Valeros triggers reactions
from both enemies when
he moves out of the second
square and into the third.
3. If Seoni Strides to position 3,
she triggers reactions from the
hobgoblin and the troll. Because
of its 10-foot reach, the troll
could use its reaction when
Seoni left either square. She
could Step twice to get there to
avoid triggering reactions, but
that uses 2 actions instead of 1.
2
1
3
Valeros
Seoni
Troll
Hobgoblin
Core Rulebook
474
creature is willing, unconscious, or dead and if it is your
size or smaller. The GM might allow you to climb atop
the corpse or unconscious body of a larger creature in
some situations. A prone creature can’t stand up while
someone else occupies its space, but it can Crawl to a
space where it’s able to stand, or it can attempt to Shove
the other creature out of the way.
Creatures of Different Sizes
In most cases, you can move through the space of a
creature at least three sizes larger than you (Table 9-1).
This means a Medium creature can move through the
space of a Gargantuan creature and a Small creature can
move through the space of a Huge creature. Likewise, a
bigger creature can move through the space of a creature
three sizes smaller than itself or smaller. You still can’t
end your movement in a space occupied by a creature.
Tiny creatures are an exception. They can move through
creatures’ spaces and can even end their movement there.
Objects
Because objects aren’t as mobile as creatures are, they’re
more likely to fill a space. This means you can’t always
move through their spaces like you might move through
a space occupied by a creature. You might be able to
occupy the same square as a statue of your size, but not a
wide column. The GM determines whether you can move
into an object’s square normally, whether special rules
apply, or if you are unable to move into the square at all.
Forced Movement
When an effect forces you to move, or if you start falling, the
distance you move is defined by the effect that moved you,
not by your Speed. Because you’re not acting to move, this
doesn’t trigger reactions that are triggered by movement.
If forced movement would move you into a space you
can’t occupy—because objects are in the way or because you
lack the movement type needed to reach it, for example—
you stop moving in the last space you can occupy. Usually
the creature or effect forcing the movement chooses the path
the victim takes. If you’re pushed or pulled, you can usually
be moved through hazardous terrain, pushed off a ledge,
or the like. Abilities that reposition you in some other way
can’t put you in such dangerous places unless they specify
otherwise. In all cases, the GM makes the final call if there’s
doubt on where forced movement can move a creature.
Terrain
Several types of terrain can complicate your movement by
slowing you down, damaging you, or endangering you.
Difficult Terrain
Difficult terrain is any terrain that impedes your
movement, ranging from particularly rough or unstable
surfaces to thick ground cover and countless other
impediments. Moving into a square of difficult terrain (or
moving 5 feet into or within an area of difficult terrain, if
you’re not using a grid) costs an extra 5 feet of movement.
Moving into a square of greater difficult terrain instead
[diagram: counting movement]
Counting Movement
Lini decides to Stride. She has a Speed
of 20  feet. She moves straight south,
spending 5 feet of her Speed, then
diagonally, spending another 5 feet. Her
next diagonal move, because it’s her
second diagonal of the turn, costs her 10
feet of movement. She’s spent all 20 feet
of her Speed and ends that Stride.
She Seeks, and something catches her
eye to the northeast, so she decides to
move toward it. However, the crumbled
stone is difficult terrain, so each square
costs 5 more feet of Speed. She moves
diagonally, spending 10 feet of movement
since this is an odd-numbered diagonal.
She wants to move northeast again, but
that would cost her 15 feet (10 feet for
an even-numbered diagonal and 5 more
for being difficult terrain). Instead, she
decides to move directly north. This costs
her 10 feet, so she’s used all 20 feet of
her Speed and is out of actions.
5 feet
5 feet
10 feet
10 feet
10 feet
15 feet
Lini
475
PLAYING THE GAME 9
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
costs 10 additional feet of movement. This additional
cost is not increased when moving diagonally. You can’t
Step into difficult terrain.
Movement you make while you are jumping ignores the
terrain you’re jumping over. Some abilities (such as flight
or being incorporeal) allow you to avoid the movement
reduction from some types of difficult terrain. Certain
other abilities let you ignore difficult terrain on foot;
such an ability also allows you to move through greater
difficult terrain at the normal movement cost as for
difficult terrain, though it wouldn’t let you ignore greater
difficult terrain unless the ability specifies otherwise.
Hazardous Terrain
Hazardous terrain damages you whenever you move
through it. An acid pool and a pit of burning embers are
both examples of hazardous terrain. The amount and
type of damage depend on the specific hazardous terrain.
Narrow Surfaces
A narrow surface is so precariously thin that you need to
Balance (see Acrobatics on page 240) or risk falling. Even
on a success, you are flat-footed on a narrow surface.
Each time you are hit by an attack or fail a save on a
narrow surface, you must succeed at a Reflex save (with
the same DC as the Acrobatics check to Balance) or fall.
Uneven Ground
Uneven ground is an area unsteady enough that you need
to Balance (see Acrobatics on page 240) or risk falling
prone and possibly injuring yourself, depending on the
specifics of the uneven ground. You are flat-footed on
uneven ground. Each time you are hit by an attack or
fail a save on uneven ground, you must succeed at a
Reflex save (with the same DC as the Acrobatics check to
Balance) or fall prone.
Inclines
An incline is an area so steep that you need to Climb
using the Athletics skill in order to progress upward.
You’re flat-footed when Climbing an incline.
Flanking
When you and an ally are flanking a foe, it has a harder
time defending against you. A creature is flat-footed
(taking a –2 circumstance penalty to AC) to creatures that
are flanking it.
To flank a foe, you and your ally must be on opposites
sides or corners of the creature. A line drawn between
the center of your space and the center of your ally’s
space must pass through opposite sides or opposite
corners of the foe’s space. Additionally, both you and
the ally have to be able to act, must be wielding melee
weapons or able to make an unarmed attack, can’t be
under any effects that prevent you from attacking, and
must have the enemy within reach. If you are wielding
a reach weapon, you use your reach with that weapon
for this purpose.
Seoni
Flanking
1. Valeros and Kyra are flanking the
ogre because they can draw a line
to each other that passes through
opposite sides of the ogre’s space.
The ogre is flat-footed to them, taking
a –2 circumstance penalty to its AC.
2. Merisiel isn’t flanking the ogre
because she can’t draw a line to
Valeros or Kyra that passes through
opposite sides of the ogre’s space,
and the ogre is not in Seoni’s reach.
3. The hobgoblin and ogre flank Seoni,
since she is within reach for both, and
they can draw a line between them
that passes through opposite sides
of her space. If the ogre didn’t have
10 feet of reach, the two creatures
wouldn’t flank her.
3
1
2
Valeros
Merisiel
Kyra
Ogre
Hobgoblin
Core Rulebook
476
Cover
1. Valeros and the ogre don’t have any cover
from one another. The line from the center
of Valeros’s space to the center of the ogre’s
space doesn’t pass through blocking terrain
or other creatures.
2. The ogre and Seoni have lesser cover from
one another. The line between the centers
of their spaces doesn’t pass through any
blocking terrain, but does passes through
Valeros’s space.
3. The ogre and Merisiel have cover from one
another. The line between the centers of
their spaces crosses blocking terrain.
4. Kyra and the ogre can barely see one
another, but have cover from one another
because the line between the centers of
their spaces goes through blocking terrain.
Because there’s so much blocking terrain
in the way, the GM will likely rule this is
greater cover.
4 1 3
2
Kyra
Seoni
Merisiel
Cover
When you’re behind an obstacle that could block
weapons, guard you against explosions, and make you
harder to detect, you’re behind cover. Standard cover
gives you a +2 circumstance bonus to AC, to Reflex saves
against area effects, and to Stealth checks to Hide, Sneak,
or otherwise avoid detection. You can increase this to
greater cover using the Take Cover basic action, increasing
the circumstance bonus to +4. If cover is especially light,
typically when it’s provided by a creature, you have lesser
cover, which grants a +1 circumstance bonus to AC. A
creature with standard cover or greater cover can attempt
to use Stealth to Hide, but lesser cover isn’t sufficient.
Type of Cover Bonus Can Hide
Lesser +1 to AC No
Standard +2 to AC, Reflex, Stealth Yes
Greater +4 to AC, Reflex, Stealth Yes
Cover is relative, so you might simultaneously have
cover against one creature and not another. Cover applies
only if your path to the target is partially blocked. If a
creature is entirely behind a wall or the like, you don’t have
line of effect (page 457) and typically can’t target it at all.
Usually, the GM can quickly decide whether your target
has cover. If you’re uncertain or need to be more precise,
draw a line from the center of your space to the center of
the target’s space. If that line passes through any terrain or
object that would block the effect, the target has standard
cover (or greater cover if the obstruction is extreme or the
target has Taken Cover). If the line passes through a creature
instead, the target has lesser cover. When measuring cover
against an area effect, draw the line from the effect’s point
of origin to the center of the creature’s space.
Cover and Large Creatures
If a creature between you and a target is two or more sizes
larger than both you and your target, that creature’s space
blocks the effect enough to provide standard cover instead
of lesser cover. The GM might determine that a creature
doesn’t gain cover from terrain that it’s significantly larger
than. For example, a Huge dragon probably wouldn’t
receive any benefit from being behind a 1-foot-wide pillar.
Special Circumstances
Your GM might allow you to overcome your target’s cover
in some situations. If you’re right next to an arrow slit,
you can shoot without penalty, but you have greater cover
against someone shooting back at you from far away.
Your GM might let you reduce or negate cover by leaning
around a corner to shoot or the like. This usually takes an
action to set up, and the GM might measure cover from an
edge or corner of your space instead of your center.
Special Battles
Sometimes fights occur while the characters are atop
mounts or when the PCs take to the sky or seas.
Valeros
Ogre
477
PLAYING THE GAME 9
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
the area. You are in an attacker’s reach or range if any
square of your mount is within reach or range. Because
your mount is larger than you and you share its space, you
have lesser cover against attacks targeting you when you’re
mounted if the mount would be in the way.
Because you can’t move your body as freely while you’re
riding a mount, you take a –2 circumstance penalty to
Reflex saves while mounted. Additionally, the only move
action you can use is the Mount action to dismount.
Aerial Combat
Many monsters can fly, and PCs can use spells and items
to gain the ability to fly. Flying creatures have to use the
Fly action (page 472) to move through the air. Performing
an especially tricky maneuver—such as trying to reverse
course 180 degrees or fly through a narrow gap—might
require using Acrobatics to Maneuver in Flight. Creatures
might fall from the sky, using the falling rules found on
page 463. At the GM’s discretion, some ground-based
actions might not work in the air. For instance, a flying
creature couldn’t Leap.
Aquatic Combat
Use these rules for battles in water or underwater:
• You’re flat-footed unless you have a swim Speed.
• You gain resistance 5 to acid and fire.
• You take a –2 circumstance penalty to melee slashing
or bludgeoning attacks that pass through water.
• Ranged attacks that deal bludgeoning or slashing
damage automatically miss if the attacker or target is
underwater, and piercing ranged attacks made by an
underwater creature or against an underwater target
have their range increments halved.
• You can’t cast fire spells or use actions with the fire
trait underwater.
• At the GM’s discretion, some ground-based actions
might not work underwater or while floating.
Drowning and Suffocating
You can hold your breath for a number of rounds equal to
5 + your Constitution modifier. Reduce your remaining air
by 1 round at the end of each of your turns, or by 2 if you
attacked or cast any spells that turn. You also lose 1 round
worth of air each time you are critically hit or critically fail
a save against a damaging effect. If you speak (including
casting spells with verbal components or activating items
with command components) you lose all remaining air.
When you run out of air, you fall unconscious and start
suffocating. You can’t recover from being unconscious and
must attempt a DC 20 Fortitude save at the end of each of
your turns. On a failure, you take 1d10 damage, and on a
critical failure, you die. On each check after the first, the
DC increases by 5 and the damage by 1d10; these increases
are cumulative. Once your access to air is restored, you
stop suffocating and are no longer unconscious (unless
you’re at 0 Hit Points).
Mounted Combat
You can ride some creatures into combat. As noted in the
Mount specialty basic action (page 472), your mount needs
to be at least one size larger than you and willing. Your
mount acts on your initiative. You must use the Command
an Animal action (page 249) to get your mount to spend
its actions. If you don’t, the animal wastes its actions. If
you have the Ride general feat, you succeed automatically
when you Command an Animal that’s your mount.
For example, if you are mounted on a horse and you
make three attacks, your horse would remain stationary
since you didn’t command it. If you instead spent your first
action to Command an Animal and succeeded, you could
get your mount to Stride. You could spend your next action
to attack or to command the horse to attack, but not both.
Mounted Attacks
You and your mount fight as a unit. Consequently, you
share a multiple attack penalty. For example, if you Strike
and then Command an Animal to have your mount Strike,
your mount’s attack takes a –5 multiple attack penalty.
You occupy every square of your mount’s space for the
purpose of making your attacks. If you were Medium and
on a Large mount, you could attack a creature on one
side of your mount, then attack on the opposite side with
your next action. If you have a longer reach, the distance
depends partly on the size of your mount. On a Medium
or smaller mount, use your normal reach. On a Large or
Huge mount, you can attack any square adjacent to the
mount if you have 5- or 10-foot reach, or any square
within 10 feet of the mount (including diagonally) if you
have 15-foot reach.
Mounted Defenses
When you’re mounted, attackers can target either you or
your mount. Anything that affects multiple creatures (such
as an area) affects both of you as long as you’re both in
THREE-DIMENSIONAL COMBAT
In aerial and aquatic combat, you might need to track
positioning in three dimensions. For flying creatures, you
might use one of the following methods:
• Find platforms to place flying creatures’ miniatures on.
• Set a die next to a creature with the number indicating
how many squares up in the air it is.
• Make a stack of dice or tokens, 1 per 5 feet of elevation.
• Write the elevation next to the monster on the grid.
In underwater combat, choose a plane to be the
baseline, typically the waterline, the sea floor, or a
stationary object you can measure from.
As with ground-based movement, moving diagonally
up or down in 3-D space requires counting every other
diagonal as 10 feet. Measure flanking in all directions—
creatures above and below an enemy can flank it just as
effectively as they can from opposite sides.
Core Rulebook
478
Much of exploration mode involves movement and
roleplaying. You might be traveling from one town to
another, chatting with a couple of merchants an outpost
along the way, or maybe having a terse conversation with
the watchful city guards at your destination. Instead of
measuring your rate of movement in 5-foot squares every
round, you measure it in feet or miles per minute, hour,
or day, using your travel speed. Rather than deciding on
each action every turn, you’ll engage in an exploration
activity, and you’ll typically spend some time every day
resting and making your daily preparations.
Travel Speed
Depending on how the GM tracks movement, you move
in feet or miles based on your character’s Speed with the
relevant movement type. Typical rates are on the table below.
TABLE 9–2: TRAVEL SPEED
 Feet Miles Miles
Speed per Minute per Hour per Day
10 feet 100 1 8
15 feet 150 1-1/2 12
20 feet 200 2 16
25 feet 250 2-1/2 20
30 feet 300 3 24
35 feet 350 3-1/2 28
40 feet 400 4 32
50 feet 500 5 40
60 feet 600 6 48
The rates in Table 9–2 assume traveling over flat and clear
terrain at a determined pace, but one that’s not exhausting.
Moving through difficult terrain halves the listed movement
rate. Greater difficult terrain reduces the distance traveled to
one-third the listed amount. If the travel requires a skill check
to accomplish, such as mountain climbing or swimming, the
GM might call for a check once per hour using the result
and the table above to determine your progress.
Exploration Activities
While you’re traveling and exploring, tell the GM what
you’d generally like to do along the way. If you to do
nothing more than make steady progress toward your
goal, you move at the full travel speeds given in Table 9–2.
When you want to do something other than simply
travel, you describe what you are attempting to do. It
isn’t necessary to go into extreme detail, such as “Using
my dagger, I nudge the door so I can check for devious
traps.” Instead, “I’m searching the area for hazards” is
sufficient. The GM finds the best exploration activity to
match your description and describes the effects of that
activity. Some exploration activities limit how fast you
can travel and be effective.
These are most common exploration activities.
AVOID NOTICE
 EXPLORATION
You attempt a Stealth check to avoid notice while traveling
at half speed. If you have the Swift Sneak feat, you can move
at full Speed rather than half, but you still can’t use another
exploration activity while you do so. If you have the Legendary
Sneak feat, you can move at full Speed and use a second
exploration activity. If you’re Avoiding Notice at the start of
an encounter, you usually roll a Stealth check instead of a
Perception check both to determine your initiative and to see
if the enemies notice you (based on their Perception DCs, as
normal for Sneak, regardless of their initiative check results).
DEFEND
EXPLORATION
You move at half your travel speed with your shield raised. If
combat breaks out, you gain the benefits of Raising a Shield
before your first turn begins.
DETECT MAGIC
CONCENTRATE EXPLORATION
You cast detect magic at regular intervals. You move at half
your travel speed or slower. You have no chance of accidentally
overlooking a magic aura at a travel speed up to 300 feet per
minute, but must be traveling no more than 150 feet per minute
to detect magic auras before the party moves into them.
FOLLOW THE EXPERT
AUDITORY CONCENTRATE EXPLORATION VISUAL
Choose an ally attempting a recurring skill check while exploring,
such as climbing, or performing a different exploration tactic
that requires a skill check (like Avoiding Notice). The ally must
be at least an expert in that skill and must be willing to provide
assistance. While Following the Expert, you match their tactic
or attempt similar skill checks. Thanks to your ally’s assistance,
you can add your level as a proficiency bonus to the associated
skill check, even if you’re untrained. Additionally, you gain
a circumstance bonus to your skill check based on your ally’s
proficiency (+2 for expert, +3 for master, and +4 for legendary).
Exploration Mode
While encounters use rounds for combat, exploration is more free form. The GM determines
the flow of time, as you could be traveling by horseback across craggy highlands, negotiating
with merchants, or delving in a dungeon in search of danger and treasure. Exploration lacks
the immediate danger of encounter mode, but it offers its own challenges.
479
PLAYING THE GAME 9
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SKILL EXPLORATION ACTIVITIES
Chapter 4: Skills includes numerous additional exploration
activities, which are summarized here.
Borrow an Arcane Spell: You use Arcana to prepare a
spell from someone else’s spellbook (page 241).
Coerce: You use Intimidation to threaten a creature so
it does what you want (page 247).
Cover Tracks: You use Survival to obscure your
passing (page 252).
Decipher Writing: You use a suitable skill to understand
archaic, esoteric, or obscure texts (page 234).
Gather Information: You use Diplomacy to canvass the
area to learn about a specific individual or topic (page 246).
Identify Alchemy: You use Craft and alchemist’s tools
to identify an alchemical item (page 245).
Identify Magic: Using a variety of skills, you can learn
about a magic item, location, or ongoing effect (page 238).
Impersonate: You use Deception and usually a disguise
kit to create a disguise (page 245).
Learn a Spell: You use the skill corresponding to the
spell’s tradition to gain access to a new spell (page 238).
Make an Impression: You use Diplomacy to make a
good impression on someone (page 246).
Repair: With a repair kit and the Crafting skill, you fix
a damaged item (page 243).
Sense Direction: You use Survival to get a sense of where
you are or determine the cardinal directions (page 252).
Squeeze: Using Acrobatics, you squeeze though very
tight spaces (page 241).
Track: You use Survival to find and follow creatures’
tracks (page 252).
Treat Wounds: You use Medicine to treat a living
creature’s wounds (page 249).
HUSTLE
EXPLORATION MOVE
You strain yourself to move at double your travel speed. You can
Hustle only for a number of minutes equal to your Constitution
modifier × 10 (minimum 10 minutes). If you are in a group that is
Hustling, use the lowest Constitution modifier among everyone
to determine how fast the group can Hustle together.
INVESTIGATE
CONCENTRATE EXPLORATION
You seek out information about your surroundings while traveling
at half speed. You use Recall Knowledge as a secret check to
discover clues among the various things you can see and engage
with as you journey along. You can use any skill that has a Recall
Knowledge action while Investigating, but the GM determines
whether the skill is relevant to the clues you could find.
REPEAT A SPELL
CONCENTRATE EXPLORATION
You repeatedly cast the same spell while moving at half speed.
Typically, this spell is a cantrip that you want to have in effect
in the event a combat breaks out, and it must be one you can
cast in 2 actions or fewer. In order to prevent fatigue due
to repeated casting, you’ll likely use this activity only when
something out of the ordinary occurs.
You can instead use this activity to continue Sustaining a
Spell or Activation with a sustained duration. Most such spells
or item effects can be sustained for 10 minutes, though some
specify they can be sustained for a different duration.
SCOUT
CONCENTRATE EXPLORATION
You scout ahead and behind the group to watch danger, moving
at half speed. At the start of the next encounter, every creature in
your party gains a +1 circumstance bonus to their initiative rolls.
SEARCH
CONCENTRATE EXPLORATION
You Seek meticulously for hidden doors, concealed hazards,
and so on. You can usually make an educated guess as to which
locations are best to check and move at half speed, but if you
want to be thorough and guarantee you checked everything, you
need to travel at a Speed of no more than 300 feet per minute, or
150 feet per minute to ensure you check everything before you
walk into it. You can always move more slowly while Searching
to cover the area more thoroughly, and the Expeditious Search
feat increases these maximum Speeds. If you come across a
secret door, item, or hazard while Searching, the GM will attempt
a free secret check to Seek to see if you notice the hidden object
or hazard. In locations with many objects to search, you have to
stop and spend significantly longer to search thoroughly.
Rest and Daily
Preparations
You perform at your best when you take enough time to
rest and prepare. Once every 24 hours, you can take a
period of rest (typically 8 hours), after which you regain
Hit Points equal to your Constitution modifier (minimum
1) times your level, and you might recover from or
improve certain conditions (page 453). Sleeping in armor
results in poor rest that leaves you fatigued. If you go
more than 16 hours without resting, you become fatigued
(you cannot recover from this until you rest at least 6
continuous hours).
After you rest, you make your daily preparations, which
takes around 1 hour. You can prepare only if you’ve rested,
and only once per day. Preparing includes the following:
• Spellcasters regain spell slots, and prepared
spellcasters choose spells to have available that day.
• Focus Points, other abilities that refresh during
your preparations, and abilities that can be used
only a certain number of times per day, including
magic item uses, are reset.
• You don armor and equip weapons and other gear.
• You invest up to 10 worn magic items to gain their
benefits for the day.
Core Rulebook
480
Downtime gives you time to rest fully, engage in crafting
or a professional endeavor, learn new spells, retrain feats,
or just have fun. You can sell items acquired during your
adventures, buy new goods, and perform other activities
as determined by your feats, your skills, and the settlement
where you are spending the downtime.
Long-Term Rest
You can spend an entire day and night resting during
downtime to recover Hit Points equal to your Constitution
modifier (minimum 1) multiplied by twice your level.
Retraining
Retraining offers a way to alter some of your character
choices, which is helpful when you want to take your
character in a new direction or change decisions that
didn’t meet your expectations. You can retrain feats,
skills, and some selectable class features. You can’t
retrain your ancestry, heritage, background, class,
or ability scores. You can’t perform other downtime
activities while retraining.
Retraining usually requires you to spend time learning
from a teacher, whether that entails physical training,
studying at a library, or falling into shared magical
trances. Your GM determines whether you can get proper
training or whether something can be retrained at all. In
some cases, you’ll have to pay your instructor.
Some abilities can be difficult or impossible to retrain
(for instance, a sorcerer can retrain their bloodline only in
extraordinary circumstances).
When retraining, you generally can’t make choices
you couldn’t make when you selected the original
option. For instance, you can’t exchange a 2nd-level
skill feat for a 4th-level one, or for one that requires
prerequisites you didn’t meet at the time you took the
original feat. If you don’t remember whether you met
the prerequisites at the time, ask your GM to make the
call. If you cease to meet the prerequisites for an ability
due to retraining, you can’t use that ability. You might
need to retrain several abilities in sequence in order to
get all the abilities you want.
Feats
You can spend a week of downtime retraining to swap out
one of your feats. Remove the old feat and replace it with
another of the same type. For example, you could swap a
skill feat for another skill feat, but not for a wizard feat.
Skills
You can spend a week of downtime retraining to swap
out one of your skill increases. Reduce your proficiency
rank in the skill losing its increase by one step and
increase your proficiency rank in another skill by one
step. The new proficiency rank has to be equal to or lower
than the proficiency rank you traded away. For instance,
if your bard is a master in Performance and Stealth, and
an expert in Occultism, you could reduce the character’s
proficiency in Stealth to expert and become a master in
Occultism, but you couldn’t reassign that skill increase
to become legendary in Performance. Keep track of
your level when you reassign skill increases; the level
at which your skill proficiencies changed can influence
your ability to retrain feats with skill prerequisites.
You can also spend a week to retrain an initial trained
skill you gained during character creation.
Class Features
You can change a class feature that required a choice,
making a different choice instead. This lets you change
a druid order or a wizard school, for example. The
GM will tell you how long this takes—always at least
a month.
Other Downtime Activities
Work with your GM if there are other ways you want
to spend downtime. You might need to pay for your cost
of living (the prices for this can be found on page 294).
You might acquire property, manage a business, become
part of a guild or civic group, curry favor in a large city,
take command of an army, take on an apprentice, start a
family, or minister to a flock of the faithful.
Downtime Mode
Downtime mode is played day-by-day rather than minute-by-minute or scene-by-scene. Usually
this mode of play occurs when you are in the safety of a settlement, maybe recovering from
your adventures or studying an artifact you found.
SKILL DOWNTIME ACTIVITIES
Chapter 4: Skills includes several downtime activities,
which are summarized here.
Craft: Using the Crafting skill, you can create items
from raw materials (page 244).
Create Forgery: You forge a document (page 251).
Earn Income: You earn money, typically using Crafting,
Lore, or Performance (page 236).
Subsist: You find food and shelter in the wilderness or
within a settlement (page 240).
Treat Disease: You spend time caring for a diseased
creature in the hope of curing that creature (page 248).
481
PLAYING THE GAME 9
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Core Rulebook
482
When you take on the role of Game Master, you’ll have
the rewarding job of crafting fun experiences for a group
of your friends. Your responsibilities include...
• Telling the story of the group’s adventures in a
compelling and consistent way.
• Fleshing out the world in which the game takes
place, emphasizing the fantastical while grounding
it enough in the real world to feel believable.
• Entertaining the players and yourself with novel
concepts, and rewarding creative ideas with
interesting outcomes.
• Preparing for game sessions by building or studying
adventures and creating characters and plots.
• Improvising the reactions of nonplayer characters
and other forces in the world as the players do
unexpected things.
• Making rules decisions to ensure fairness and keep
the game moving forward.
This chapter provides the tools you need to shoulder
those responsibilities. The following sections break
down the various components of a campaign, discuss the
different modes of play and how to set DCs for the tasks
the PCs attempt, provide different ways of rewarding
player characters, and describe aspects of the environment
that might affect an adventuring party.
Planning a Campaign
A Pathfinder game is typically structured as a campaign—a
serialized story that focuses on a single party of characters.
A campaign is subdivided into multiple adventures,
smaller stories that involve exploration and interaction
with nonplayer characters. A single adventure represents a
complete story that might be connected to the larger arc of
a campaign. Playing an adventure spans one or more game
sessions—gatherings where the group plays a part of the
adventure over the course of several hours.
A campaign provides the overall structure for your
Pathfinder game. As you prepare for your campaign, you’ll
establish its scope and themes, which you’ll then reinforce
in the adventures and scenes that take place within it.
CAMPAIGN LENGTH
The length of a campaign can range from a few sessions
to many years. Two main factors determine campaign
length: how much time you need to complete the story,
and how much time players want to devote to the game.
Chapter 10: Game Mastering
As Game Master, you run each session of Pathfinder, providing the link between the players
and the world of the game. It’s up to you to set the scene as the player characters battle
monsters, interact with other people, and explore the world.
COLLABORATION DURING PLAY
As Game Master, you have the final say on how the world
and rules function, and how nonplayer characters act.
This rule’s purpose is to make the game run smoothly,
with one guiding hand ensuring consistency. It’s not
intended to make one player into a dictator over the rest
of the group. Collaboration is vital to roleplaying games!
How you implement collaboration in a game depends
on what your players are interested in. In some groups,
players enjoy adding details to the world and to nonplayer
characters. In others, players want to feel like the world
is outside their control, and the only decisions they get to
make are those made by their own characters. Both are
fun and acceptable ways to play.
You are encouraged to collect input from your players
before you start, asking what storytelling genres they’d
like to emphasize, which areas of the world they want to
play in, the types of enemies they’d like to face, or which
published adventure they want to play. A good campaign
includes some back-and-forth at the beginning as the
players figure out what characters they want to play and
you figure out what sort of adventure to run. The results
can range from building an adventure entirely to fit the
characters to choosing a specific published adventure,
having the players make their characters, and then just
adapting the beginning of that adventure so that all the
player characters have a reason to be involved.
As you play, opportunities to collaborate will occur
again and again. When players throw out suggestions
or come up with specific theories about the events of
the campaign, they’re telling you what they’d like to
see in the game. Try to find ways to incorporate their
suggestions, but with enough of a twist that each still
includes something unexpected.
A single session, or a “one-shot,” is great if your group
is trying out Pathfinder or wants to play a specific short
adventure. This requires a smaller time commitment but
requires the GM to present the events of the game in a way
that is immediately engaging, since there’s less opportunity
for the players to become invested in the story or setting.
If you want to play through a longer campaign, you’ll
need to add some story elements that speak directly to the
characters in your game rather than just to the events of
the adventure. In other words, the characters should have
individual goals in addition to the group’s overall goals.
10
483
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
You can estimate how long a campaign will take by
looking at the amount of time you actually have to play, or
the number of character levels you intend the characters
to advance. It typically takes three to four sessions for a
group to level up. Since you’ll probably cancel sessions
on occasion, playing once a week for a year results in
roughly a 14-level campaign, playing every 2 weeks for a
year gives you an 8-level campaign, and playing monthly
allows for a 5-level campaign. If you play only once a
month, you might consider holding longer sessions and
using fast advancement (page 509).
It’s entirely okay to have a campaign with an indefinite
length. Many groups play through one adventure and
then decide to take on another. If you run an indefinite
campaign, however, avoid ongoing plots that you can’t
satisfactorily end if the campaign comes to a close after
the next adventure. If you introduce an overwhelmingly
powerful villain who’s crucial to the story but can’t be
stopped until the player characters are 15th level, ending
the campaign at 8th level will feel anticlimactic.
It pays to be conservative when estimating your
campaign length and scope. It’s always tempting to run a
20-level epic campaign with complex, interwoven plots,
but such games can fall apart long before the end if your
group can play only once a month and the players have
other responsibilities.
Expected Duration
Not every campaign ends at the same point. Some
campaigns go all the way to 20th level, ending after the
player characters attain the height of power and confront
the greatest threats any mortal could face. Others end at
a lower level, after the group takes down a major villain
or solves a crucial problem. And still other campaigns
end when players become unable to attend or decide its a
good time to stop playing.
You should have an end point in mind when you start
a campaign. Still, you have to be flexible, since you’re
telling the story alongside other players, and your initial
expectations for the campaign may be proven incorrect.
When you think you’re heading toward a satisfying
conclusion, it’s useful to check in with the other players.
You might say, “I think we have about two sessions left.
Does that work for everyone? Is there any unfinished
business you want to take care of?” This lets you gauge
whether your assumptions match up with the rest of the
group—and make any necessary adjustments.
THEMES
The themes you choose for your campaign are what
distinguish it from other campaigns. They include the
major dramatic questions of your story and the repeated
use of certain environments or creatures, and they can
Core Rulebook
484
also include embracing a genre beyond traditional high
fantasy. The themes you choose for your campaign also
suggest storyline elements you might use.
A storyline’s themes usually relate to the backstories,
motivations, and flaws of the player characters and villains.
For example, if you’ve chosen revenge as one of the themes
of your game, you might introduce a villain whose quest
for revenge tears his life apart and causes tragic harm
to those around him. If one of the player characters is a
chaotic good believer in liberty and freedom, you might
engage that character by pitting the group against slavers.
Or, you might choose a theme of love, leading to nonplayer
characters involved in doomed romances, seeking to regain
lovers they have lost, or courting the player characters.
Using similar locations and related creatures helps you
form connections between disparate adventures. The
players feel like their characters are becoming experts
negotiating with giants, navigating seaways, battling
devils, exploring the planes, or dealing with whatever
the recurring elements are. For example, you might have
the players explore a frozen tundra early on, then later
travel to an icy plane filled with more difficult challenges
that can be overcome using knowledge they’ve previously
developed. Likewise, hobgoblin soldiers may be tough
enemies for your group at low levels, but as the PCs attain
higher levels and the hobgoblins become mere minions of
another creature, the players feel a sense of progression.
Pathfinder is a fantasy adventure game, but you can shift
your campaign to include elements of other fictional genres.
You might want to infuse your game a with a sense of horror,
reduce the amount of magic and use slow advancement
(page 509) to make it a tale of sword and sorcery, or turn
magic into technology for a steampunk setting.
A WELCOMING ENVIRONMENT
The role of Game Master comes with the responsibility of
ensuring you and the rest of the players have a rewarding,
fun time during the game. Games can deal with difficult
subjects and have stressful moments, but fundamentally
Pathfinder is a leisure activity. It can remain so only if the
players follow the social contract and respect one another.
Players with physical or mental disabilities might find
themselves more challenged than abled players. Work
with your players to ensure they have the resources
and support they need. Additionally, be on the lookout
for behavior that’s inappropriate, whether intentional
or inadvertent, and pay careful attention to players’
body language during the game. If you notice a player
becoming uncomfortable, you are empowered to pause
the game, take it in a new direction, privately check in
with your players during or after the session, or take any
other action you think is appropriate.
If a player tells you they’re uncomfortable with
something in the game, whether it’s content you’ve
presented as the GM or another player’s or PC’s actions,
listen carefully to that player and take steps to ensure
they can once again have fun during your game. If you’re
preparing prewritten material and you find a character
or a situation inappropriate, you are fully empowered
to change any details as you see fit. You also have the
authority (and responsibility) to ask players to change
their behavior—or even leave the table—if what they’re
doing is unacceptable or makes others feel uncomfortable.
It’s never appropriate to make the person who is
uncomfortable responsible for resolving a problem. It’s
okay if mistakes happen. What’s important is how you
respond and move forward.
Gaming is for everyone. Never let those acting in bad
faith undermine your game or exclude other players. Your
efforts are part of the long-term process of making games
and game culture welcoming to all. Working together, we
can build a community where players of all identities and
experiences feel safe.
TOOLS FOR RESPONSIBLE PLAY
Consent and comfort are important topics for roleplaying
games, and many designers have created techniques to
help facilitate responsible play. Some methods you can use
are lines and veils, developed by Ron Edwards, and the
X-Card, developed by John Stavropoulos.
Lines and Veils
The terms “line” and “veil” can give your table a common
vocabulary for the concepts described in this section. A
line is a hard limit to the actions players might take, such
as “We’re drawing a line at torture.” The group agrees not
to cross a line and omits that content from the game.
A veil indicates something that shouldn’t be described
in detail. The scene fades to black for a veil, or the group
moves on to discuss a different topic, though whatever the
veil is drawn across still happens. For example, you might
say, “We’ll draw a veil across the scene as those characters
head into the bedroom.”
You might come up with some lines and veils in advance,
but then find more as play continues.
The X-Card
Draw an “X” on a card, and you’ve got an X-Card. Place it on
the table at the start of the session and describe its use to
the players: any player can silently reject content they find
upsetting by tapping the X-Card; whoever’s speaking then
rewinds a bit and continues on, excising the objectionable
content. As with setting the basic guidelines for your
campaign, there are no questions asked, no judgment, and
no argument when someone invokes the X-Card. You can,
however, ask for clarification if you need it, such as “How far
back should I rewind this?” Some groups instead make an
X with their hands, say “Let’s X that out,” or use some other
method. Either way, follow up with the player privately,
after the game, to see if the guidelines need to be revised.
You can find more details at tinyurl.com/x-card-rpg.
GAME MASTERING
485
10
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
• Reprehensible uses of mind-control magic
Villains might engage in such acts, but they won’t happen
“on-screen” or won’t be described in detail. Many groups
choose to not have villains engage in these activities at all,
keeping these reprehensible acts out of mind entirely.
Social Splash Damage
As important as it is to take care of yourself and the other
players in your game, be mindful of your group’s impact
on the other people around you. If you’re playing in a
space that’s not your own, respect your hosts. If you’re
playing in public, consider the comfort of the people
around you, not just what your group is comfortable with.
It’s easy to get caught up in a game, as we get sucked into
the microcosm of an imagined world, but don’t ignore the
real world around you. Be aware when you’re making
too much noise, leaving a mess, alarming passersby with
graphic descriptions of violence, or even just giving the
cold shoulder to curious spectators witnessing RPG play
for the first time.
CHARACTER CREATION
At the outset of a new campaign, the players will create
new player characters. Part of that process involves you
introducing what the campaign will be about and what
types of characters are most appropriate. Work with the
players to determine which rule options are available. The
safest options are the common choices from the Pathfinder
Core Rulebook. If players want to use common options
from other books or uncommon or rare options, through
play, review those options to see if any of them conflict
with the style of campaign you have in mind or might
present strange surprises down the road. It’s usually best to
allow new options, but there’s no obligation to do so. Be as
open as you’re comfortable with.
Preparing an Adventure
An adventure is a self-contained collection of story
elements, characters, and settings that become the basis
for the story you and the other players tell. Think of
the adventure as an outline for your own story. You’ll
have major beats you want to include, some consistent
characters, and themes you want to convey, but all sorts
of things can change during the process of turning the
outline into a completed story.
You might use a published adventure from Paizo or
another company, or you might construct your own
adventure as you prepare for your game sessions.
PUBLISHED ADVENTURES
Prewritten adventures include background information
and nonplayer characters needed for the story, plus all the
locations, maps, and monster groups necessary for both
exploration and encounters. Prewritten adventures can
speed up your preparation, since you can simply read the
Objectionable Content
Before a campaign begins, check in with your players—
as a group or individually—to find out what types of
content they want to allow in the game, and which topics
they would prefer to avoid. Because the story unfolds in
real time, it’s essential that you discuss these topics before
the game starts. These discussions are intended to keep
players safe, and so it’s not okay to ask why someone
wants a type of content banned. If someone wants it
banned, ban it—no questions asked.
It can help to start with a rating, like those used for
movies or video games. Pathfinder games often include
violence and cruelty. What’s the limit on how graphically
these concepts should be described? Can players swear at
the table? Does anyone have phobias they don’t want to
appear in the game, such as spiders or body horror?
After you figure out the limits on objectionable content,
you have four important tasks:
• Clearly convey these limits to the other players.
• Ensure you and the players abide by the boundaries.
• Act immediately if someone becomes uncomfortable
about content during a session, even if it wasn’t
already banned in a prior discussion. Once the issue
is resolved, move on.
• Resolve the issue if any player deliberately pushes
these boundaries, tries to find loopholes, tries to
renegotiate the limits, or belittles people for having
a different tolerance to objectionable content.
The Pathfinder Baseline
You might find that your players don’t have much to say
on the topic of objectionable content, and just assume that
general societal mores will keep the most uncomfortable
topics out of the game. That’s not always enough, as that
approach relies on shared assumptions that aren’t always
accurate. The following is a set of basic assumptions that
works for many groups, which you can modify to fit your
preferences and those of the other players.
• Bloodshed, injuries, and even dismemberment
might be described. However, excessive descriptions
of gore and cruelty should be avoided.
• Romantic and sexual relationships can happen in
the game, but players should avoid being overly
suggestive. Sex always happens “off-screen.”
Because attempts at initiating a relationship
between player characters can be uncomfortably
similar to one player hitting on another, this should
generally be avoided (and is entirely inappropriate
when playing with strangers).
• Avoid excessively gross or scatological descriptions.
The following acts should never be performed by
player characters:
• Torture
• Rape, nonconsensual sexual contact, or sexual threats
• Harm to children, including sexual abuse
• Owning slaves or profiting from the slave trade
Core Rulebook
486
CHARACTERS WITH DISABILITIES
A player might want to create a character with a disability,
or their character might end up with a disability over
the course of play. Work with the player to find ways to
respectfully represent the disability. Conditions such as
blinded and deafened aren’t a good fit for a character
who has been living with a disability long-term. Here are
suggestions for rules you might use for PCs with disabilities.
Blindness or Impaired Vision
A blind character can’t detect anything using vision,
critically fails Perception checks requiring sight, is immune
to visual effects, and can’t be blinded or dazzled. You might
give this character the Blind-Fight feat (page 149) for free.
A character with impaired vision might take a –2 to –4
penalty to vision-based Perception checks. Spectacles or
other corrective devices might reduce or remove this.
Deafness or Being Hard of Hearing
A deaf character can’t detect anything using hearing,
critically fails Perception checks that require hearing, and is
immune to auditory effects. They have enough practice to
supply verbal components for casting spells and command
components for activating magic items, but if they perform
an action they’re not accustomed to that involves auditory
elements, they must succeed at a DC 5 flat check or the
action is lost. It’s best to give them the Sign Language feat
for free, and you might give them Read Lips as well (page
266 and 265). You might give one or more other characters
in the group Sign Language for free as well.
A hard-of-hearing character might take a –2 to –4
penalty to Perception checks that are hearing-based.
Corrective devices for hearing are less common than
spectacles are in a typical Pathfinder world.
Missing Limb
Some magic items require certain limbs or other body parts.
It’s fine to allow an alternative form of the item, turning
boots into bracers for a character without legs, for example.
A character with a missing hand or arm might need
to spend 2 actions to Interact with an item that requires
two hands, or otherwise compensate. Using a two-handed
weapon is not possible. A character can acquire a
prosthetic hand or arm to compensate.
Someone missing a foot or leg might take a small
penalty to Speed, but can typically acquire a prosthetic
to compensate. If they have no legs, they might use a
wheelchair, a dependable mount, or levitation or flight magic.
Mental Illness and Chronic Illness
Some disabilities, such as mental illness and chronic
illnesses, are best left to the player to roleplay. Mental illness
is an especially fraught topic, with a history of insensitive
portrayal. Be careful about the intentions of the player and
the impact the presentation might have on other players.
relevant sections of the adventure before a game, and you
don’t have to create everything from scratch. A published
adventure already includes the expected amount of
encounters and treasure, and you can find adventures built
for different character levels to match your group. Reading
a published adventure or running one as your first game
can help you see how adventures are structured, which
makes it easier to write one later if you choose.
Though a published adventure is prewritten, it’s not
set in stone. Changing the details of an adventure to suit
your group isn’t just acceptable, it’s preferred! Use the
backstories and predilections of the player characters to
inform how you change the adventure. This can mean
altering adversaries so they’re linked to the player
characters, changing the setting to a place some of the
player characters are from, or excising particular scenes
if you know they won’t appeal to your players.
CREATING ADVENTURES
Building your own adventure is much more challenging
than using a published one, but it lets you express yourself,
be even more creative, and tailor the game directly to the
players and their characters. Later sections in this chapter
include guidelines for building and running encounters,
placing treasure, and setting appropriately difficult
challenges, all to help you construct your own adventures.
Adventure plotting can start at many different points.
You might begin with a particular antagonist, then
construct an adventure that fits that villain’s theme and
leads the group to them. Alternatively, you could start with
an interesting location for exploration, then populate it
with adversaries and challenges appropriate to the setting.
Locations
Memorable settings that include mysterious and fantastical
locations for players to visit can elicit the players’ curiosity.
Exploring each location should be a treat in itself, not
just a chore the players must complete to get from one
fight to the next. As you create a locale, picture it in your
mind’s eye and write down minor details you can include
as you narrate the game. Describing decorations, natural
landmarks, wildlife, peculiar smells, and even temperature
changes make a place feel more real.
Beyond monsters and loot, your locations can include
environment-based challenges, from environmental
conditions like blizzards to puzzles, traps, or other hazards.
These challenges should suit your adventure’s location:
walls of brambles in a castle ruin overrun with vegetation,
pools of acid in a cursed swamp, or magical traps in the
tomb of a paranoid wizard. Rules for environments appear
on page 512, and those for hazards start on page 520.
Encounters
A robust set of encounters forms the backbone of your
adventure. Encounters often feature combat with other
creatures, but they can also include hazards, or you might
GAME MASTERING
487
10
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
create social encounters in which characters duel only
with words. The rules for building encounters appropriate
to your group’s level begin below.
Some adventures have a clear and direct progression,
with encounters occurring at specific times or in a specific
order. Others, such as a dungeon filled with interconnected
rooms the group can investigate in any order, are
nonlinear, and the group can face encounters in any
order—or even avoid them entirely. Most adventures are
somewhere in between, with some keystone encounters
you know the characters will need to contend with, but
others that are optional.
Treasure
Your adventure should give out an amount of treasure
that’s appropriate to the characters’ level. The guidelines
for assigning treasure are on page 508. You can dole out
treasure in all kinds of ways. Treasure could be items carried
by an adversary, rewards from a patron for completing a
mission, or a classic pile of coins and items inside a wooden
chest guarded by a monster. It’s best to spread treasure
throughout an adventure rather than stockpiled in a single
hoard. This gives the players incremental rewards, letting
their characters advance in frequent small steps rather than
giant leaps separated by many hours of play.
BUILDING ENCOUNTERS
The most common type of encounter is a combat
encounter, where the PCs face other creatures. Combat
encounters are strictly governed by rules; the guidelines
that follow will help you build combat encounters that
pose appropriate challenges for your group. Building
hazard encounters works the same way. Social encounters
are more free-form, and are up to you as the GM to design.
To build a combat encounter, first decide how the
encounter fits in the adventure as a whole. Then, estimate
how much of a threat you want the encounter to pose,
using one of five categories below.
Trivial-threat encounters are so easy that the characters
have essentially no chance of losing; they shouldn’t
even need to spend significant resources unless they
are particularly wasteful. These encounters work best
as warm-ups, palate cleansers, or reminders of how
awesome the characters are. A trivial-threat encounter
can still be fun to play, so don’t ignore them just because
of the lack of threat.
Low-threat encounters present a veneer of difficulty
and typically use some of the party’s resources. However,
it would be rare or the result of very poor tactics for the
entire party to be seriously threatened.
Moderate-threat encounters are a serious challenge
to the characters, though unlikely to overpower them
completely. Characters usually need to use sound tactics
and manage their resources wisely to come out of a
moderate-threat encounter ready to continue on and face
a harder challenge without resting.
USING RARITY AND ACCESS
The rarity system has two purposes: to convey how
common or rare certain spells, creatures, or items are in
the game world, and to give you an easy tool to control
the complexity of your game. Uncommon and rare options
aren’t more powerful than other options of their level, but
they introduce complications for certain types of stories,
or are less common in the world. For instance, it might
be more challenging to run a mystery adventure when a
player can cast an uncommon spell such as detect evil.
At the start of the campaign, communicate your
preferred expectations on rarity to the players. Unless
you decide otherwise, the players can choose from any
common options they qualify for, plus any uncommon
options granted by their character choices—primarily
their ancestry and class. By default, a character who
tries hard enough might eventually find an uncommon
option, whereas a rare option is always a special reward.
Beyond that baseline, you can grant access as freely as
you want; some GMs open up all uncommon and rare
options universally. If you’re not sure, just look over any
uncommon or rare elements before you include them as
rewards or otherwise allow a player to acquire them.
Rewards
You can use uncommon and rare rules elements to
reward characters. These still have the same value and
approximate power as any other treasure of the same
Price, but they’re just a bit more special because they hail
from distant lands or have unusual or surprising abilities.
Items are the most likely candidates for uncommon or rare
rewards, but an NPC might teach an uncommon or rare
spell to a PC in gratitude or to help the party prepare for
a certain adversary. You can also improvise extra benefits
based around uncommon or rare items. For instance, if
a PC gains a rare plant with occult uses, you might also
decide that the PC should temporarily get more money if
they use it while Earning Income using Herbalism Lore,
because it enables them to produce novel poultices.
Different Locations
The rarities in this book assume you’re playing in the
Inner Sea region of Golarion, where most Pathfinder
games are set. These rarities are also suitable for most
western medieval fantasy games. However, you might
want to alter the rarities for a campaign set in another
location on Golarion (detailed in Chapter 8), to emphasize
a non-human culture, or to play in a fantasy setting with
different roots, like a wuxia game based on Chinese
culture. These changes most often affect basic items. If
you start your campaign in a dwarven stronghold, for
example, you might make all the weapons with the dwarf
trait common. You should feel free to adjust rarities to
suit your campaign’s theme, but if you do, you should
share your changes with your group.
Core Rulebook
488
Severe-threat encounters are the hardest encounters
most groups of characters can consistently defeat. These
encounters are most appropriate for important moments in
your story, such as confronting a final boss. Bad luck, poor
tactics, or a lack of resources due to prior encounters can
easily turn a severe-threat encounter against the characters,
and a wise group keeps the option to disengage open.
Extreme-threat encounters are so dangerous that
they are likely to be an even match for the characters,
particularly if the characters are low on resources. This
makes them too challenging for most uses. An extremethreat encounter might be appropriate for a fully rested
group of characters that can go all-out, for the climactic
encounter at the end of an entire campaign, or for a group
of veteran players using advanced tactics and teamwork.
XP Budget
Once you’ve selected a threat level, it’s time to build the
encounter. You have an XP budget based on the threat,
and each creature costs some of that budget. Start with
the monsters or NPCs that are most important to the
encounter, then decide how you want to use the rest
of your XP budget. Many encounters won’t match the
XP budget exactly, but they should come close. The XP
budget is based on a group of four characters. If your
group is larger or smaller, see Different Party Sizes below.
Choosing Creatures
In all but the most unusual circumstances, you’ll select
creatures for your encounter that range from 4 levels
lower than the PCs’ level to 4 levels higher (see Table
10–2: Creature XP and Role). Each creature has a part
to play in your encounter, from a lowly lackey to a boss
so mighty it could defeat the entire party single-handedly.
Each creature costs some of the XP from your XP
budget for the encounter, based on its level compared to
the levels of the characters in your party. For instance,
if the PCs are 5th level, a 2nd-level creature is a “party
level – 3” creature, a lackey appropriate for a lowto-moderate-threat encounter, and it costs 15 XP in an
encounter’s XP budget. Party level is explained in detail
on page 508.
Different Party Sizes
For each additional character in the party beyond the
fourth, increase your XP budget by the amount shown
in the Character Adjustment value for your encounter in
Table 10–1: Encounter Budget. If you have fewer than
four characters, use the same process in reverse: for each
missing character, remove that amount of XP from your
XP budget. Note that if you adjust your XP budget to
account for party size, the XP awards for the encounter
don’t change—you’ll always award the amount of XP
listed for a group of four characters.
It’s best to use the XP increase from more characters to
add more enemies or hazards, and the XP decrease from
fewer characters to subtract enemies and hazards, rather
than making one enemy tougher or weaker. Encounters
are typically more satisfying if the number of enemy
creatures is fairly close to the number of player characters.
Running a Game Session
A campaign happens over a series of sessions. Each session
is usually several hours long, with multiple encounters,
some exploration, and possibly downtime. Your session
can be compared to an episode of a TV show; it should
include some twists, turns, and changes, and end leaving
people excited about what comes next.
PLANNING A SESSION
One of the greatest challenges in gaming is scheduling
a time for everyone to get together and play. Often, this
responsibility falls on you as the GM, since you’re the one
who has to prepare your game between sessions. Many
games have a set schedule, such as once per week, once
every 2 weeks, or once per month. The less frequently
your group meets, the better notes and recaps you’ll need
to keep everyone on the same page.
Plan a time for everybody will arrive, and also try to
set a time when playing the game will begin. This can
make it easier for everyone to finish chatting, catching
up, and eating in a timely fashion so you can start
playing the game. Having an end time in mind is also
fairly important. A typical game session lasts about 4
hours, though some groups hold 2-hour sessions or play
marathon games. Less than 2 hours usually isn’t enough
time to get much done in most Pathfinder campaigns. If
your session will be longer than 2 hours, plan out some
15-minute breaks (in addition to bathroom and beverage
breaks, which players can take as needed).
TABLE 10–1: ENCOUNTER BUDGET
Threat XP Budget Character Adjustment
Trivial 40 or less 10 or less
Low 60 15
Moderate 80 20
Severe 120 30
Extreme 160 40
TABLE 10–2: CREATURE XP AND ROLE
Creature Level XP Suggested Role
Party level – 4 10 Low-threat lackey
Party level – 3 15 Low- or moderate-threat lackey
Party level – 2 20 Any lackey or standard creature
Party level – 1 30 Any standard creature
Party level 40 Any standard creature or low-threat
boss
Party level + 1 60 Low- or moderate-threat boss
Party level + 2 80 Moderate- or severe-threat boss
Party level + 3 120 Severe- or extreme-threat boss
Party level + 4 160 Extreme-threat solo boss
GAME MASTERING
489
10
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
RUNNING A SESSION
During a session, you’re in charge of keeping the game’s
action moving, managing the different modes of play,
fielding questions, and making rules decisions. You’ll also
want to keep a rough eye on the time, so you can end
when most convenient for the group.
You’re the interface between the rules and the
imagined world you and the other players share. They
will ask you questions, and they’ll act based on their own
assumptions. It’s up to you to establish what’s true in the
world, but you don’t do this unilaterally. You’re informed
by the setting’s backstory, your preparations, and the
suggestions and assumptions the other players bring to the
table. Keep in mind that until you announce something,
your own plans are subject to change. For example, if you
originally intended the owner of a tavern to be kindly and
well-intentioned, but a player misreads her and invents
an interesting conspiracy theory regarding her intentions
that sounds fun, you might convert the tavern owner into
an agent of evil after all.
You’ll also determine when PCs and foes need to attempt
checks, as well as the consequences of those rolls. This
comes up most often outside of encounters, as encounters
are more regimented about when checks happen and how
they are resolved. In an encounter, a player can usually
determine their own character’s turn, with you chiming in
only to say whether an attack hits or if something in the
environment requires a character to attempt a check.
STARTING A SESSION
Once everyone is ready, get everyone’s attention and
cover the following topics. These are in a rough order
that you can change based on your group’s style or a
session’s needs.
• Recap what happened during the previous sessions.
• Establish where the characters are at the beginning
of this session. Have they been resting since their
last challenge? Are they in a hallway, preparing
to raid the next room of a dungeon? Tell players
whether their characters had time to rest or
recover since the last session.
• Remind players that they each have 1 Hero Point
at the start of the session (page 507).
• Establish goals. The players should have an idea
of what they want to do next. Reestablish any
goals the group already had, then let the players
weigh in on whether these goals still apply, and
on whether there’s anything else they hope
to accomplish in this session.
• Commence adventuring! Decide which mode of
play you’re going to start in, then lead off with a
verbal prompt to get the action started. You might
ask a question related to a particular character, have
everyone immediately roll initiative as a monster
attacks, or briefly describe the environment and
sensations that surround the player characters,
allowing them to react.
Core Rulebook
490
The Spotlight
As you run the game, keep track of who has the spotlight.
It can be easy to keep attention on the most outgoing
player or character, but you need to check in with all the
players. If a player hasn’t contributed in some time, stop
and ask, “What’s your character doing at this point?” If
the player’s not sure, add a detail or nonplayer character
to the scene that the player might find interesting.
Distractions and Interruptions
Maintaining the players’ attention keeps a game moving
and leads to memorable moments when everyone’s in the
same zone. Too many interruptions break the flow. This
is fine in moderation. Distractions become a problem if
they’re too frequent, as they cause people to miss things
and make misinformed decisions as the session becomes
disconnected. Yet every game includes breaks—sometimes
intentional, sometimes not—and digressions. Finding the
right balance of diversions for your group is essential.
A game is a social gathering, so there’s definitely a place
for conversation that’s not directly related to playing the
game. These interruptions become a problem if they’re too
frequent, or if people are talking over others. If a player
repeatedly interrupts you or other people or undercuts
every crucial moment of the game with a joke, talk to them
about limiting their comments to appropriate times. Often,
all you need to do is hold up your hand or otherwise
indicate that the player is talking out of turn to delay them
until after you or another speaker finishes talking.
Phones and other mobile devices are another major
source of distraction. Banning them entirely is often
impractical—many players use apps to roll dice or manage
their character sheets, or they need to answer texts from
their partner, check in on a work project, or otherwise
stay connected with people who rely on them. However,
you can set ground rules against using a device for
anything that’s not time-sensitive or game-related, such
as refreshing social media, checking the score of a hockey
game, playing a mobile game, or answering a non-urgent
text. You can relax these rules for players when their
characters are “offstage.” If a player’s character isn’t in a
scene, that might be a good time for the player to use a
mobile device.
ADJUDICATING THE RULES
As the GM, you are responsible for solving any rules
disputes. Remember that keeping your game moving is
more important than being 100% correct. Looking up
rules at the table can slow the game down, so in many
cases it’s better to make your best guess rather than scour
the book for the exact rule. (It can be instructive to look
those rules up during a break or after the session, though!)
To make calls on the fly, use the following guidelines,
which are the same principles the game rules are based on.
You might want to keep printouts of these guidelines and
the DC guidelines (page 503) for quick reference.
• If you don’t know how long a quick task takes, go
with 1 action, or 2 actions if a character shouldn’t be
able to perform it three times per round.
• If you’re not sure what action a task uses, look for
the most similar basic action. If you don’t find one,
make up an undefined action (page XXX) adding
any necessary traits (usually attack, concentrate,
manipulate, or move).
• When two sides are opposed, have one roll against
the other’s DC. Don’t have both sides roll (initiative
is the exception to this rule). The character who
rolls is usually the one acting (except in the case of
saving throws).
• If an effect raises or lowers chances of success, grant a
+1 circumstance bonus or a –1 circumstance penalty.
• If you’re not sure how difficult a significant
challenge should be, use the DC for the party’s level.
• If you’re making up an effect, creatures should be
incapacitated or killed on only a critical success
(or for a saving throw, on a critical failure).
• If you don’t know what check to use, pick the most
appropriate skill. If no other skill applies to a check
to Recall Knowledge, use an appropriate Lore skill
(usually at an untrained proficiency rank).
• Use the characters’ daily preparations as the time
to reset anything that lasts roughly a day.
• When a character accomplishes something
noteworthy that doesn’t have rules for XP, award
them XP for an accomplishment (10 to 30 XP, as
described on page 507).
• When the PCs fail at a task, look for a way they
might fail forward, meaning the story moves
OFF-SESSION GAMING
Session play with a full group isn’t the only way to play
Pathfinder. Finding opportunities to expand on the game
outside of its regular schedule can keep your group
engaged between sessions.
You can get together with a single player to run a
mini-session for their character, covering a mission that’s
important to their story but doesn’t concern the rest
of the group. You and the players can work out what
their characters do during solid stretches of downtime
via e-mail or chat messages. You can also give players
opportunities to collaborate on details of the story,
like having a player design a heraldic symbol for the
adventuring group or map out their home base. You might
even decide to award a Hero Point at the next session to
a player for events that happened outside a session.
Some events aren’t suitable for handling outside of
sessions. Any event that strongly affects a character
whose player isn’t present should be handled at the
table when everyone can attend. It’s also helpful to
recap events that took place outside of the session for all
characters so no one feels excluded or lost.
GAME MASTERING
491
10
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
forward with a negative consequence rather than
the failure halting progress entirely.
SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES
The player characters in your group will at times attempt
tasks that should be easier or harder than the rules or
adventure would otherwise lead you to expect, such
as a PC Gathering Information in their hometown. In
these cases, you can just apply a circumstance bonus or
penalty. Usually, this is +1 or –1 for a minor but significant
circumstance, but you can adjust this bonus or penalty to
+2 or –2 for a major circumstance. The maximum bonus
or penalty, +4 or –4, should apply only if someone has an
overwhelming advantage or is trying something extremely
unlikely but not quite impossible.
You can also add traits to actions. Let’s say that during a
fight, Seelah dips her sword into a brazier of hot coals before
swinging it at an enemy with a weakness to fire. You could
add the fire trait to this attack. A PC getting an advantage
in this way should usually have to use an action to do so,
so Seelah would get the benefit for one attack, but to do it
again she’d need to bury her sword in the coals once more.
INCORPORATING ADDITIONAL OPTIONS
You might grant players access to additional rule or
character options. If you feel confident that allowing a
character to take a particular option will be a good addition
to your game, then go for it! If you’re uncertain or worried
about a request, you don’t have to allow it, and it’s your call
to make. However, try to meet players halfway or suggest
alternatives. If you want to allow an option on a trial basis
but are worried it might become a problem later, talk to
the player beforehand and explain that you are tentatively
allowing the option, but might change your mind later,
after you see how the option can be used during play.
Pathfinder Society
Organized play campaigns allow you to play in and run
games all over the world with persistent characters. If you
want to play Pathfinder this way, you can do so through
the Pathfinder Society Roleplaying Guild! Once you go
online to PathfinderSociety.club to make an account, you
can organize games yourself with your friends or join an
existing event.
Pathfinder Society primarily uses 4- to 5-hour adventures
called scenarios. At the start of a session when you’re
running a scenario, you’ll collect your players’ information.
At the end of the adventure, you’ll record the rewards their
characters earn for completing the scenario, all of which
are detailed in the adventure. Once you report the session’s
results online, the rewards become a persistent part of
these characters, even if they play in other games with
other groups. These scenarios include important choices,
and you can report what your group chose—decisions that
will guide the future of the campaign!
PAIZO’S PUBLISHED ADVENTURES
You can purchase the following types of adventures at
paizo.com, your local game store, or many book stores. If
you want to acquire all the adventures in a given line, you
can purchase a subscription at paizo.com.
Pathfinder Adventure Paths
Each monthly volume of a Pathfinder Adventure Path
leads into the next as part of a greater story spanning
multiple volumes. The first volume of each Adventure
Path typically starts at 1st level, and each volume has a
self-contained story that eventually leads to a big climax
at the end of the final volume. Each volume also typically
includes new monsters, rules, and details about the world.
Each Adventure Path has a different theme, and their
settings range across the Inner Sea region and beyond.
Pathfinder Adventures
Pathfinder Adventures are standalone adventures that
cover several levels of play. They’re self-contained and
typically have a unique structure or theme. You can play
through a Pathfinder Adventure on its own or as part of
your ongoing campaign—some make ideal side adventures
for Adventure Paths that have similar themes.
Pathfinder Society Scenarios
Scenarios are the adventures used by the Pathfinder
Society Roleplaying Guild; you can play them as part of
the Pathfinder Society or on your own. Each takes about
4 to 5 hours to run, so you can tell a whole story in a
short amount of time, but they’re also part of a larger
continuity and can be combined together to form the
basis of a longer campaign.
SHARING RESPONSIBILITY
Just because you’re the GM and ostensibly in charge
doesn’t mean you have to do all the extra work to make
the campaign run. Some of the tasks described here, like
scheduling games, taking notes, and giving recaps, can be
delegated to other players. You might also have someone
track initiative or the Hit Points of the PCs’ foes for you
in encounters, or even run those foes if you have a large
group and someone would rather do that than control
a character of their own. It’s also great when someone
else can host a session, provide snacks for the group, or
take on other responsibilities that aren’t directly related
to the game.
It’s best to figure out a schedule of responsibilities
when you’re first setting up a game. Ask the players
what they’re willing to take on. If you start to feel
overwhelmed partway through a campaign, you can
revisit the topic and try out new options until you find a
setup that’s comfortable.
Core Rulebook
492
Encounters take place in real time or slower, and they
involve direct engagement between players and enemies,
potential allies, or each other. Combat and direct social
interaction usually take place in encounter mode.
Exploration is the connective tissue of an adventure,
and it is used whenever characters are exploring a place
where there’s danger or uncertainty, such as an unfamiliar
city or a dungeon. In exploration mode, characters
aren’t in immediate peril, but they must still be on
their toes. Exploration and encounters are collectively
called adventuring.
When the party isn’t adventuring, the characters are in
downtime. This mode covers most of a normal person’s
life, such as mundane, day-to-day tasks and working
toward long-term goals.
Encounters
Encounter mode is the most structured mode of play,
and you’ll mostly be following the rules presented in
Chapter 9 to run this mode. Because you usually call for
initiative during exploration before transitioning into
an encounter, guidelines for initiative order appear on
page 498 in the discussion of exploration mode. Rules
for building combat encounters appear on page 488.
Stakes: Moderate to high. Encounters always have
significant stakes, and they are played in a step-by-step
time frame to reflect that.
Time Scale: Encounter mode is highly structured and
proceeds in combat rounds for combat encounters,
while other sorts of encounters can have rounds
of any length. In combat, 1 minute consists of 10
rounds, where each combat round is 6 seconds long,
but you might decide a verbal confrontation proceeds
in minute-long or longer rounds to give each speaker
enough time to make a solid point.
Actions and Reactions: In combat encounters, each
participant’s turn is broken into discrete actions, and
participants can use reactions when their triggers occur.
Reactions can occur in social situations, though their
triggers are usually more descriptive and less tactical.
CHOOSING ADVERSARIES’ ACTIONS
Players often coordinate and plan to be as efficient as
possible, but their adversaries might not. As the GM,
you’re roleplaying these foes, and you decide their tactics.
Most creatures have a basic grasp of simple tactics like
flanking or focusing on a single target. But you should
remember that they also react based on emotions and
make mistakes—perhaps even more than the player
characters do.
When selecting targets or choosing which abilities to
use, rely on the adversaries’ knowledge of the situation,
not your own. You might know that the cleric has a high
Will save modifier, but a monster might still try to use a
fear ability on her. That doesn’t mean you should play
adversaries as complete fools; they can learn from their
mistakes, make sound plans, and even research the player
characters in advance.
Adversaries usually don’t attack a character who’s
knocked out. Even if a creature knows a fallen character
might come back into the fight, only the most vicious
creatures focus on helpless foes rather than the more
immediate threats around them.
Running adversaries is a mix of being true to the
creature and doing what’s best for the drama of the
game. Think of your encounter like a fight scene in a
movie or novel. If the fighter taunts a fire giant to draw
its attention away from the fragile wizard, the tactically
sound decision is for the giant to keep pummeling the
wizard. But is that the best choice for the scene? Perhaps
everyone will have more fun if the giant redirects its ire to
the infuriating fighter.
BYPASSED ENCOUNTERS
What happens if you’ve planned a fight or challenge
and the PCs find a way to avoid it entirely? This could
leave them behind in XP or cause them to miss important
information or treasure.
In the case of XP, the guidelines are simple: If the
player characters avoided the challenge through smart
tactical play, a savvy diplomatic exchange, clever use of
magic, or another approach that required ingenuity and
planning, award them the normal XP for the encounter.
If they did something that took only moderate effort
or was a lucky break, like finding a secret passage and
using it to avoid a fight, award them XP for a minor or
moderate accomplishment. In an adventure that’s more
free-form, like a sprawling dungeon with multiple paths,
there might be no reward for bypassing an encounter,
because doing so was trivial.
You’ll have to think on your feet if information or items
get skipped when players bypass encounters. First, look
for another reasonable place in the adventure to place the
information or item. If it makes sense, move the original
encounter to another part of the adventure and give the
PCs a major advantage for bypassing the encounter in
the first place.
Running Modes of Play
Pathfinder sessions are divided into three different modes of play: encounters, exploration,
and downtime. Each mode represents different kinds of situations, with specific stakes
and time scales, and characters can use different sorts of actions and reactions in each.
GAME MASTERING
493
10
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
ENDING ENCOUNTERS
A combat encounter typically ends when all the creatures
on one side are killed or knocked unconscious. Once
this happens, you can stop acting in initiative order.
The surviving side then has ample time to ensure that
everyone taken out stays down. However, you might need
to keep using combat rounds if any player characters are
near death, clinging to a cliff, or in some other situation
where every moment matters for their survival.
You can decide a fight is over if there’s no challenge
left, and the player characters are just cleaning up the last
few weak enemies. However, avoid doing this if any of
the players still have inventive and interesting things they
want to try or spells they’re concentrating on—ending
an encounter early is a tool to avoid boredom, not to
deny someone their fun. You can end a fight early in
several ways: the foes can surrender, an adversary can die
before its Hit Points actually run out, or you can simply
say the battle’s over and that the PCs easily dispatch
their remaining foes. In this last case, you might ask, “Is
everyone okay if we call the fight?” to make sure your
players are on board.
One side might surrender when almost all its
members are defeated or if spells or skills thoroughly
demoralize them. Once there’s a surrender, come out
of initiative order and enter into a short negotiation.
These conversations are really about whether the
winners will show mercy to the losers or just kill
or otherwise get rid of them. The surrendering side
usually doesn’t have much leverage in these cases, so
avoid long back-and-forth discussions.
Fleeing Enemies
Fleeing enemies can be a problem. Player characters
often want to pursue foes that flee because they think an
enemy might return as a threat later on. Avoid playing
this out move by move, as it can easily bog down the
game. If every adversary is fleeing, forgo initiative
order and give each PC the option to pursue any one
fleeing foe. Each PC can declare one action, spell, or
other ability to use to try to keep up. Then, compare the
PC’s Speed to that of the target, assess how much the
pursuer’s chosen spell or ability would help, and factor
in any abilities the quarry has that would aid escape.
If you determine that the pursuer catches up, go back
into combat with the original initiative order. If not, the
quarry escapes for now.
If the PCs decide to flee, it’s usually best to let them do
so. Pick a particular location and allow them to escape
once they all reach it. However, if they’re encumbered
or otherwise slowed down, or if enemies have higher
Speeds and a strong motive to pursue, you might impose
consequences upon PCs who flee.
SOCIAL ENCOUNTERS
Most conversations play best as free-form roleplaying,
with maybe one or two checks for social skills involved.
Sometimes, though, a tense situation or crucial parlay
requires a social encounter that uses initiative, much like
a combat encounter. As with any other encounter, the
stakes of a social encounter need to be high! A failed social
encounter could mean a character is imprisoned or put to
death, a major rival becomes a political powerhouse, or a
key ally is disgraced and ostracized.
Using the structure of an encounter is helpful because
it makes the timing clearer than in free-form play, and
each character feels like they’re contributing. When
running a social encounter, establish the stakes up
front, so the players know the consequences of success
or failure and the circumstances that will cause the
encounter to end.
You have much more flexibility in how you run a
social encounter than in a combat encounter. Extending
the length of rounds beyond 6 seconds, allowing more
improvisation, and focusing less on special attacks and
spells all differentiate a social encounter from a combat
one. In most cases, you don’t need to worry about
character’s movements, nor do you need a map. Some
examples of social encounters include:
• Proving someone’s innocence in front of a judge.
• Convincing a neighboring monarch to help defend
against an invasion.
• Besting a rival bard in a battle of wits.
• Exposing a villain’s deception before a noble court.
Initiative and Actions
Initiative in a social encounter typically has characters
rolling Society or a Charisma-based skill, such as
PLAYING WITHOUT A GRID
The Pathfinder rules are built to play combat encounters
on a 1-inch grid, but you can play without a grid or map.
In what’s traditionally called the “theater of the mind,”
you and other players imagine the locations of the
combatants and the environment. In this style of play,
you’ll frequently need to make judgment calls. These are
usually simple, like “Can I see the ogre from where I’m
standing?” or “Can I get to the ogre with one Stride?” It’s
often best to have a player tell you what they want to do,
such as “I want to cross the beam to get to the ogre and
attack it.” Then, you tell the player how that breaks down
into actions, like “You’ll need to spend one action and
succeed at an Acrobatics check, then Stride to get close
enough, then you’ll have one action left for a Strike.”
When preparing encounters, avoid using lots of
difficult terrain, cover, or other battlefield challenges
that work better on a grid. Also, be more lenient with
combat tactics like flanking. You won’t have a way to
measure flanking, but the rules expect melee characters
like rogues to often get into a flanking position—often,
two characters ganging up in melee is enough to count.
Core Rulebook
494
Diplomacy or Deception. As with other encounters, a
character’s approach to the conflict determines which
skill they’ll roll. On a character’s turn, they typically get
to attempt one roll, usually by using a skill action. Let
the player roleplay what their character says and does,
then determine what they’ll roll. Allow them to use any
abilities or spells that might help them make their case,
though keep in mind that when most people see the visual
signs of a spell being cast, they think someone is using
magic to try to influence or harm them, and they have a
negative reaction.
Good social encounters include an opposition.
This can be direct, such as a rival who argues against
the characters’ case, or passive, such as a mob that
automatically becomes more unruly as each round
passes. Give the opposition one or more positions in the
initiative order so you can convey what it is doing. You
can create game statistics for the opposition, especially if
it’s an individual, but in situations like that of the unruly
mob, you might need nothing more than establish a set
of increasingly difficult DCs.
Measuring Success and Progress
You’ll need to decide how to measure the characters’
success in social encounters, because there’s no AC
to target or HP to whittle down. Chapter 4 includes
guidance on setting DCs for social skill actions, often
using a target’s Will DC. If you need a DC for people who
don’t have stats, such as a crowd or an NPC for whom
you haven’t already generated statistics, use the guidelines
on setting DCs, found on page 503. You can either pick a
simple DC or use a level-based DC, estimating a level for
the subject or how challenging it should be to sway them.
The attitude conditions—hostile, unfriendly, indifferent,
friendly, and helpful—provide a useful way to track the
progress of a social encounter. Use these to represent
the attitude of an authority, a crowd, a jury, or the like.
A typical goal for a social encounter is to change the
attitude of a person or group to helpful so they assist you,
or calming a hostile group or person to defuse a situation.
Try to give the players a clear idea of how much they’ve
progressed as the encounter proceeds.
Another option is to track the number of successes
or failures the characters accrue. For instance, you
might need to trick four guards into leaving their posts,
and count each successful attempt to Lie or Create a
Diversion toward a total of four necessary successes.
You can combine these two methods; if the PCs need a
group of important nobles to vote their way, the goal of
the encounter might be to ensure that a majority of the
nobles have a better attitude toward the PCs than they
have of a rival—all within a limited time frame.
GAME MASTERING
495
10
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Consequences
When you set stakes at the start of a social encounter,
give an idea of the consequences. Beyond whatever
narrative benefits player characters might gain, a social
encounter usually includes an XP award. Because these are
encounters along the same lines as combat encounters, they
grant a sizable amount of XP, typically that of a moderate
accomplishment, or even a major accomplishment if the
encounter was the culmination of long-term plans or a
significant adversary got their comeuppance.
The outcome of a social encounter should direct
the story of the game. Look for repercussions. Which
NPCs might view the PCs more favorably now? Which
might hold a grudge or formulate a new plan? A social
encounter can seal the fate of an NPC and end their story,
but this isn’t true for player characters. Even if something
looks truly dire for them, such as a death sentence, the
social encounter isn’t the end—there’s still time for
desperate heroics or a twist in the story.
Exploration
Exploration mode is intentionally less regimented than
encounters. As a result, during exploration you’ll be making
judgment calls on just about everything that happens.
Fundamentally, exploration is all about rewarding the
PCs for learning about their surroundings. To facilitate
this, it’s especially important to have and convey a clear
mental picture of the group’s surroundings. You’ll be
better able to keep track of where the players are and
describe the sights, sounds, and other sensations of their
adventuring locales. Encourage the players to have their
characters truly explore, and reward their curiosity. The
things they try to do in exploration mode show you what
they’re interested in and what they consider important.
As you play, you’ll get a good feel for the aspects of
exploration that intrigue certain players, and you can add
more of those things to your adventures or emphasize
these points in published adventures.
Stakes: Low to moderate. Exploration mode should be
used when there’s some amount of risk, but no immediate
danger. The PCs might be in an environment where they’re
likely to face monsters or hazards, but they usually stay
in exploration mode until they enter a fight or engage in
some other direct interaction.
Time Scale: When the PCs are in exploration mode,
time in the game world passes much faster than
real-world time at the table, so it’s rarely measured out
to the second or the minute. You can speed up or slow
down how quickly things are happening as needed. If it’s
important to know exactly how much time is passing,
you can usually estimate time spent in exploration mode
to 10-minute increments.
Actions and Reactions: Though exploration isn’t
broken into rounds, exploration activities assume the
PCs are spending part of their time using actions, such as
Seeking or Interacting. If they have specific actions they
want to use, they should ask; you can decide whether the
actions apply and whether to switch to encounter mode
for greater detail. PCs can use any relevant reactions that
come up during exploration mode.
EXPLORATION ACTIVITIES
In exploration mode, each player who wants to do
something beyond just traveling chooses an exploration
activity for their character. The most common activities
are Avoid Notice, Detect Magic, Hustle, and Search,
though there are many options available. While players
usually hew close to these default activities, there’s no
need for them to memorize the exploration activities and
use them exactly. Instead, allow each player to describe
what their character is doing. Then, as the GM, you can
determine which activity applies. This also means you
determine how an activity works if the character’s actions
differ from those on the list.
The following sections discuss exploration activities that
require adjudication from you beyond the guidelines for
players detailed on pages 479–480 of Chapter 9.
Detect Magic
This activity doesn’t enable characters to automatically
find every single magical aura or object during travel.
Hazards that require a minimum proficiency can’t be
found with detect magic, nor can illusions of equal or
higher level than the spell.
When characters find something magical using this
activity, let them know and give them the option to stop
and explore further or continue on. Stopping brings
you into a more roleplay-heavy scene in which players
can search through an area, assess different items, or
otherwise try to figure out the source of the magic and
what it does. Continuing on might cause the group to
miss out on beneficial magic items or trigger a magic trap.
Follow the Expert
A skilled character can help out less skilled allies who
choose to Follow the Expert. This is a good way to help a
character with a low Stealth modifier sneak around, get a
character with poor Athletics up a steep cliff, and so on.
Usually, a character who is Following the Expert can’t
perform other exploration activities or follow more than
one person at a time.
Investigate
As with Searching or Detecting Magic, the initial result
of Investigating is usually enough to give the investigator
a clue that leads into a more thorough examination, but
it rarely gives all possible information. For instance, a
character might note that the walls of a dungeon are
covered with Abyssal writing, but they would need
to stop to read the text or determine that it’s written
in blood.
Core Rulebook
496
Search
With a successful Perception check while Searching, a
character notices the presence or absence of something
unusual in the area, but it doesn’t provide a comprehensive
catalog of everything there. Instead, it gives a jumping-off
point for closer inspection or an encounter. For instance,
if an area has both a DC 30 secret door and a DC 25 trap,
and a Searching character got a 28 on their Perception
check, you would tell the player that their character
noticed a trap in the area, and you’d give a rough idea
of the trap’s location and nature. The party needs to
examine the area more to learn specifics about the trap,
and someone would need to Search again to get another
chance to find the secret door.
If an area contains many objects or something that will
take a while to search (such as a cabinet full of papers),
Searching would reveal the cabinet, but the PCs would have
to examine it more thoroughly to check the papers. This
usually requires the party to stop for a complete search.
You roll a secret Perception check for a Searching
character to detect any secrets they pass that’s in a
place that stands out (such as near a door or a turn in
a corridor), but not one that’s in a more inconspicuous
place (like a random point in a long hallway) unless they
are searching particularly slowly and meticulously.
SETTING A PARTY ORDER
In exploration mode, it often matters which characters
are in the front or back of the party formation. Let the
players decide among themselves where in the group their
characters are while exploring. This order can determine
who gets attacked first when enemies or traps threaten
from various directions. It’s up to you to determine the
specifics of who gets targeted based on the situation.
When you come out of exploration mode, the group
usually remains in the same general formation. Decide
the PCs’ exact positions, with their input, if you’re
moving to a grid (as usually happens at the start of a
combat encounter). If they come out of exploration mode
on their own terms, they can move around as they see fit.
For example, if they detect a trap and the rogue starts
attempting to disarm it, the other characters can move to
whatever locations they think are safe.
ADVERSE TERRAIN AND WEATHER
Exploration gets slower when the party faces dense
jungles, deep snow, sandstorms, extreme heat, or similar
difficult conditions. You decide how much these factors
impact the characters’ progress. The specific effects of
certain types of terrain and weather are described starting
on page 512.
GAME MASTERING
497
10
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Difficult terrain such as thick undergrowth usually
slows down progress. Unless it’s important how far the
group gets in a particular time frame, this can be covered
with a quick description of chopping through the vines or
trudging through a bog. If the characters are on a deadline,
adjust their progress on Table 9–2: Travel Speed (page 479),
typically cutting it in half if almost all of the land is difficult
terrain or to one-third for greater difficult terrain.
Hazardous terrain, such as the caldera of an active
volcano, might physically harm the player characters.
The group might have the option to travel directly
through or go around by spending more time. You can
transition into a more detailed scene while the characters
move through hazardous terrain and attempt to mitigate
the damage with spells or skill checks. If they endure
hazardous terrain, consider giving the PCs a minor or
moderate XP reward at the end of their exploration, with
slightly more XP if they took smart precautions to avoid
taking damage.
Dangerous crevasses, swampy bogs, quicksand, and
similar dangers are environmental hazards, which are
described beginning on page 512.
HAZARDS
Exploration can get broken up by traps and other hazards
(see Hazards on page 520). Simple hazards pose a threat
to the PCs only once and can be dealt with in exploration
mode. Complex hazards require jumping into encounter
mode until the hazard is dealt with. Disabling a trap or
overcoming a hazard usually takes place in encounter
mode. PCs have a better chance to detect hazards while
exploring if they’re using the Search activity (and the
Detect Magic activity, in the case of some magic traps).
ROLLING INITIATIVE
Transitioning from exploration to an encounter usually
involves rolling for initiative. Call for initiative once a
trap is triggered, as soon as two opposing groups come
into contact, or when a creature on one side decides to
take action against the other. For example:
• A group of PCs are exploring a cavern. They enter
a narrow passage patrolled by a group of kobold
warriors. Now that the two groups are in the same
area, it’s time to roll initiative.
• Amiri and a kobold champion agree to have
a friendly wrestling match. They square off
on a patch of dirt, and you call for initiative
using Athletics.
• Merisiel and Kyra are negotiating with the kobold
king. Things aren’t going well, so Merisiel decides
to launch a surprise attack. As soon as she says
this is her plan, you call for initiative.
• Harsk and Ezren are trying to Balance across a
narrow beam to reach an isolated kobold treasure
trove. When they get halfway across, a red dragon
who was hiding behind the mountain flies around
to attack! As soon as the dragon makes its
appearance, you call for an initiative roll.
Initiative after Reactions
In some cases, a trap or a foe has a reaction that tells
you to roll initiative. For instance, a complex trap that’s
triggered might make an attack with its reaction before
the initiative order begins. In these cases, resolve all the
results of the reaction before calling for initiative rolls.
Choosing the Type of Roll
When choosing what type of roll to use for initiative,
lean toward the most obvious choice. The most common
roll is Perception; this is what the kobolds would use in
the first example, as would Kyra and the kobold king
in the third example. The next most common skills to
use are Stealth (for sneaking up, like the dragon in the
last example) and Deception (for tricking opponents,
like Merisiel in the third example). For social contests,
it’s common to use Deception, Diplomacy, Intimidation,
Performance, or Society.
If you’re unsure what roll to call for, use Perception.
If a different type of roll could make sense for a character,
EXPLORATION ACTIVITIES
The following exploration activities are fully detailed on
pages 479–480 of Chapter 9. Many more appear within
Chapter 4: Skills.
• Avoid Notice
• Defend
• Detect Magic
• Follow the Expert
• Hustle
• Investigate
• Repeat a Spell
• Scout
• Search
Improvising New Activities
If a player wants to do something not covered by other
rules, here are some guidelines. If the activity is similar
to an action someone could use in an encounter, such
as Avoid Notice, it usually consists of a single action
repeated roughly 10 times per minute (such as using the
Sneak action 10 times) or an alternation of actions that
works out similarly (such as Search, which alternates
Stride and Seek). An activity using a quicker pace,
corresponding to roughly 20 actions per minute, might
have limited use or cause fatigue, as would one requiring
intense concentration.
You might find that a player wants to do something
equivalent to spending 3 actions every 6 seconds, just like
they would in combat. Characters can exert themselves to
this extent in combat only because combat lasts such a
short time—such exertion isn’t sustainable over the longer
time frame of exploration.
Core Rulebook
498
MONITORING SPELL DURATIONS
Spell durations are approximate values that codify the
vagaries and eccentricities of magic into a convenient
number. However, that doesn’t mean you can set your
watch by a spell with a 1-hour duration. This is one of
the reasons the passage of time outside of encounters is
in your hands and isn’t as precise as encounter rounds.
If a question arises about whether a spell has expired,
you make the call. You shouldn’t be punitive, but you also
shouldn’t treat characters like they move with clockwork
precision and perfect efficiency between encounters.
There are two times these durations matter most: when
players try to fit multiple encounters within the duration
of a spell, and when they want to use a spell before a fight
and keep it in effect during the encounter.
Multiple Encounters
A 1-minute spell should last for multiple encounters only if
the encounters happen in very close proximity (usually in
two adjoining rooms) and if the PCs go directly from one
fight to the next without leaving encounter mode. If they
want to stop and heal, or if the party debates whether to go
on, the process takes enough time that the spell runs out.
Be more generous with spells lasting 10 minutes or
more. A 10-minute spell easily lasts for one encounter and
could continue for another if the locations are close. A
1-hour spell usually lasts for several encounters.
Before a Fight
Casting advantageous spells before a fight (sometimes
called “pre-buffing”) gives the characters a big advantage,
since they can spend more combat rounds on offensive
actions instead of preparatory ones. If the players have the
drop on their foes, you usually can let each character cast
one spell or prepare in some similar way, then roll initiative.
Casting preparatory spells before combat becomes
a problem when it feels rote and the players assume it
will always work—that sort of planning can’t hold up in
every situation! In many cases, the act of casting spells
gives away the party’s presence. In cases where the PCs’
preparations could give them away, you might roll for
initiative before everyone can complete their preparations.
you should usually offer the choice of that roll or
Perception and let the player decide. Don’t do this if it’s
absolutely clear another kind of check matters more sense
than Perception, such as when the character is sneaking
up on enemies and should definitely use Stealth.
You can allow a player to make a case that they should
use a different skill than Perception, but only if they
base it on something they’ve established beforehand. For
example, if in the prelude to the attack, Merisiel’s player
had said, “I’m going to dangle down off the chandelier to
get the drop on them,” you could let them use Acrobatics
for their initiative roll. If they just said, “Hey, I want to
attack these guys. Can I use Acrobatics?” without having
established a reason beforehand, you probably shouldn’t
allow it.
Character Placement
When calling for initiative for a combat encounter, you’ll
need to decide where the participants in the encounter
go on the battle map. Use the party’s order, described on
page 497, as a base. You can move forward characters
who are using Stealth to get into position, putting them
in a place they could reasonably have moved up to before
having a chance to be detected. Consult with each player
to make sure their position makes sense to both of you.
RESTING
Characters require 8 hours of sleep each day. Though
resting typically happens at night, a group gains the
same benefits for resting during the day. Either way,
they can gain the benefits of resting only once every 24
hours. A character who rests for 8 hours recovers in the
following ways:
• The character regains Hit Points equal to their
Constitution modifier (minimum 1) multiplied
by their level. If they rest without any shelter or
comfort, you might reduce this healing by half (to a
minimum of 1 HP).
• The character loses the fatigued condition.
• The character reduces the severity of the doomed
and drained conditions by 1.
• Most spellcasters need to rest before they regain
their spells for the day.
A group in exploration mode can attempt to rest, but
they aren’t entirely safe from danger, and their rest might
be interrupted. The 8 hours of rest do not need to be
consecutive, however, and after an interruption, characters
can go back to sleep.
Sleeping in armor results in poor rest and causes a
character to wake up fatigued. If a character would have
recovered from fatigue, sleeping in armor prevents it.
If a character goes more than 16 hours without going
to sleep, they become fatigued.
Taking long-term rest for faster recovery is part of
downtime and can’t be done during exploration. See
page 502 for these rules.
Watches and Surprise Attacks
Adventuring parties usually put a few people on guard to
watch out for danger while the others rest. Spending time
on watch also interrupts sleep, so a night’s schedule needs
to account for everyone’s time on guard duty. Table 10–3:
Watches and Rest on the next page indicates how long the
group needs to set aside for rest, assuming everyone gets a
rotating watch assignment of equal length.
If a surprise encounter would occur during rest, you
can roll a die to randomly determine which character is
on watch at the time. All characters roll initiative; sleeping
characters typically roll Perception with a –4 status penalty
GAME MASTERING
499
10
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
for being unconscious. They don’t automatically wake up
when rolling initiative, but they might roll a Perception
check to wake up at the start of their turn due to noise. If a
savvy enemy waits for a particularly vulnerable character to
take watch before attacking, the attack can happen on that
character’s watch automatically. However, you might have
the ambusher attempt a Stealth check against the Perception
DCs of all characters to see if anyone noticed its approach.
TABLE 10–3: WATCHES AND REST
Group Total Duration of
Size Time Each Watch
2 16 hours 8 hours
3 12 hours 4 hours
4 10 hours, 40 minutes 2 hours, 40 minutes
5 10 hours 2 hours
6 9 hours, 36 minutes 1 hour, 36 minutes
DAILY PREPARATIONS
Just before setting out to explore, or after a night’s rest,
the PCs spend time to prepare for the adventuring day.
This typically happens over the span of 30 minutes to an
hour in the morning, but only after 8 full hours of rest.
Daily preparations include the following.
• Spellcasters who prepare spells choose which spells
they’ll have available that day.
• Focus Points and other abilities that reset during
daily preparations refresh. This includes abilities that
can be used only a certain number of times per day.
• Each character equips their gear. This includes
donning their armor and strapping on their weapons.
• Characters invest up to 10 worn magic items to gain
their benefits for the day (page 531).
STARVATION AND THIRST
Typically characters eat and drink enough to survive
comfortably. When they can’t, they’re fatigued until
they do. After 1 day + a creature’s Constitution modifier
without water, it takes 1d4 damage each hour that can’t
be healed until it quenches its thirst. After the same
amount of time without food, it takes 1 damage each day
that can’t be healed until it sates its hunger.
Downtime
In downtime, you can sum up the important events of
a whole day with just one roll. Use this mode when the
characters return home or otherwise aren’t adventuring.
Usually, downtime is a few minutes at the start of a
session or a break between major chapters of an adventure.
As with exploration, you might punctuate downtime with
roleplaying or encounters when it’s natural to do so.
This section describes ways to handle downtime and
details several activities and considerations specific to
downtime, such as cost of living, buying and selling goods,
long-term rest, and retraining. Most other downtime
activities are skill actions; a number of these common
downtime activities and their associated skills are listed
below. See the relevant skills in Chapter 4 for details.
• Craft (Crafting)
• Earn Income (Crafting, Lore, Performance)
• Treat Disease (Medicine)
• Create Forgery (Society)
• Subsist (Society, Survival)
Stakes: None to low. Downtime is the counterpart to
adventuring and covers low-risk activities.
Time Scale: Downtime can last days, weeks, months,
or years in the game world in a few minutes of real time.
Actions and Reactions: If you need to use actions and
reactions, switch to exploration or encounter mode.
A creature that can’t act is unable to perform most
downtime activities, but it can take long-term rest.
PLAYING OUT A DOWNTIME DAY
At the start of a given day of downtime, have all the players
declare what their characters are trying to accomplish that
day. You can then resolve one character’s efforts at a time
(or group some characters together, if they are cooperating
on a single project). Some activities, such as Earning
Income, require only a simple roll and some embellishment
from you and the player. Other activities are more involved,
incorporating encounters or exploration. You can call on
the players to play out their downtime activities in any
order, though it’s often best to do the simplest ones first.
Players who aren’t part of a more involved activity might
have time to take a break from the table while the more
complex activities are played out.
Characters can undertake their daily preparations if
they want, just as they would on a day of exploration.
Ask players to establish a standard set of preparations,
and you can assume the characters go through the same
routine every day unless their players say otherwise.
Cooperation
Multiple characters can cooperate on the same downtime
task. If it’s a simple task that requires just one check, such
as a party Subsisting as they await rescue on a desert
island, one character rolls the necessary check while
everyone else Aids that character. If it’s a complex task,
assume all of them are working on different parts of it at
one time, so all their efforts count toward its completion.
For example, a party might collaborate to build a theater,
with one character drawing up architectural plans, one
doing manual labor, and one talking to local politicians
and guilds.
Checks
Some downtime activities require rolls, typically skill
checks. Because these rolls represent the culmination
of a series of tasks over a long period, players can’t use
most abilities or spells that manipulate die rolls, such as
Core Rulebook
500
activating a magic item to gain a bonus or casting a fortune
spell to roll twice. Constant benefits still apply, though,
so someone might invest a magic item that gives them
a bonus without requiring activation. You might make
specific exceptions to this rule. If something could apply
constantly, or so often that it might as well be constant, it’s
more likely to be used for downtime checks.
LONGER PERIODS OF DOWNTIME
Running downtime during a long time off—like several
weeks, months, or even years—can be more challenging.
However, it’s also an opportunity for the characters to
progress toward long-term plans rather than worrying
about day-to-day activities. Because so much time is
involved, characters don’t roll a check for each day.
Instead, they deal with a few special events, average out
the rest of the downtime, and pay for their cost of living.
Events
After the characters state what they want to achieve in their
downtime, select a few standout events for each of them—
usually one event for a period of a week or a month, or
four events for a year or longer. These events should be
tailored to each character and their goals, and they can
serve as hooks for adventures or plot development.
Though the following examples of downtime events
all involve Earning Income, you can use them to spark
ideas for other activities. A character using Perform to
Earn Income could produce a commanding performance
of a new play for visiting nobility. Someone using Crafting
might get a lucrative commission to craft a special item.
A character with Lore might have to research a difficult
problem that needs a quick response.
PCs who want to do things that don’t correspond to a
specific downtime activity should still experience downtime
events; you just choose the relevant skill and DC. For
example, if a character intends to build their own library
to house their books on magic, you might decide setting the
foundation and organizing the library once construction
is finished are major events. The first could be a Crafting
check, and the second an Arcana or Library Lore check.
Average Progress
For long periods of downtime, you might not want to
roll for every week, or even every month. Instead, set the
level for one task using the lowest level the character can
reliably find in the place where they spend their downtime
(see Difficulty Classes on page 503 for more on setting task
levels). If the character fails this check, you might allow
them to try again after a week (or a month, if you’re dealing
with years of downtime). Don’t allow them to roll again if
they succeeded but want to try for a critical success, unless
they do something in the story of the game that you think
makes it reasonable to allow a new roll.
The events you include during a long stretch of
downtime should typically feature higher-level tasks than
GAME MASTERING
501
10
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
the baseline. For instance, a character Earning Income
with Sailing Lore for 4 months might work at a port
doing 1st-level tasks most of the time, but have 1 week
of 3rd-level tasks to account for busy periods. You’ll
normally have the player roll once for the time they spent
at 1st-level tasks and once for the week of 3rd-level tasks.
COST OF LIVING
For short periods of downtime, characters are usually just
passing through a settlement or spending a bit of time
there. They can use the prices for inn stays and meals
found on page 294. For long stretches of downtime, use
the values on Table 6–16: Cost of Living on the same
page. Deduct these costs from a character’s funds after
they gain any money from their other downtime activities.
A character can live off the land instead, but each day
they do, they typically use the Subsist activity (page 240) to
the exclusion of any other downtime activity.
BUYING AND SELLING
After an adventure yields a windfall, the characters might
have a number of items they want to sell. Likewise, when
they’re flush with currency, they might want to stock up
on gear. It usually takes 1 day of downtime to sell off a
few goods or shop around to buy a couple items. It can
take longer to sell off a large number of goods, expensive
items, or items that aren’t in high demand.
This assumes the characters are at a settlement of
decent size during their downtime. In some cases, they
might spend time traveling for days to reach bigger cities.
As always, you have final say over what sort of shops and
items are available.
An item can usually be purchased at its full Price and
sold for half its Price. Supply and demand adjusts these
numbers, but only occasionally.
LONG-TERM REST
Each full 24-hour period a character spends resting
during downtime allows them to recover double what
they would for an 8-hour rest (as listed on page 499).
They must spend this time resting in a comfortable and
secure location, typically in bed.
If they spend significantly longer in bed rest—usually
from a few days to a week of downtime—they recover
from all damage and most nonpermanent conditions.
Characters affected by diseases, long-lasting poisons,
or similar afflictions might need to continue attempting
saves during downtime. Some curses, permanent injuries,
and other situations that require magic or special care
to remove don’t end automatically during long-term rest.
RETRAINING
The retraining rules on page 481 allow a player to change
some character choices, but they rely on you to decide
whether the retraining requires a teacher, how long it
takes, if it has any associated costs, and if the ability can
be retrained at all. It’s reasonable for a character to retrain
most choices, and you should allow them. Only choices that
are truly intrinsic to the character, like a sorcerer’s bloodline,
should be off limits without extraordinary circumstances.
Try to make retraining into a story. Use NPCs the
character already knows as teachers, have a character
undertake intense research in a mysterious old library, or
ground the retraining in the game’s narrative by making
it the consequence of something that happened to the
character in a previous session.
Time
Retraining a feat or skill increase typically takes a
week. Class features that require a choice can also be
retrained but take longer: at least a month, and possibly
more. Retraining might take even longer if it would be
especially physically demanding or require travel, lengthy
experimentation, or in-depth research, but usually you
won’t want to require more than a month for a feat or
skill, or 4 months for a class feature.
A character might need to retrain several options at
once. For instance, retraining a skill increase might
mean they have skill feats they can no longer use, and
so they’ll need to retrain those as well. You can add all
this retraining time together, then reduce the total a bit to
represent the cohesive nature of the retraining.
Instruction and Costs
The rules abstract the process of learning new things as
you level up—you’re learning on the job—but retraining
suggests that the character works with a teacher or
undergoes specific practice to retrain. If you want, you
can entirely ignore this aspect of retraining, but it does
give an opportunity to introduce (or reintroduce) NPCs
and further the game’s story. You can even have one
player character mentor another, particularly when it
comes to retraining skills.
Any costs to retraining should be pretty minor—about
as much as a PC could gain by Earning Income over
the same period of time. The costs are mostly there to
make the training feel appropriate within the context
of the story, not to consume significant amounts of the
character’s earnings. A teacher might volunteer to work
without pay as a reward for something the character has
already done, or simply ask for a favor in return.
Disallowed Options
While some character options can’t normally be retrained,
you can invent ways for a character to retrain even these—
special rituals, incredible quests, or the perfect tutor. For
example, ability scores can’t normally be retrained, as that
can unbalance the game. But not all players necessarily
want to exploit the system—maybe a player simply
wants to swap an ability boost between two low stats. In
situations like this, you could let them spend a few months
working out or studying to reassign an ability boost.
Core Rulebook
502
Simple DCs
Sometimes you need to quickly set a Difficulty Class. The
easiest method is to select a simple DC from Table 10–4
by estimating which proficiency rank best matches the task
(that rank is usually not required to succeed at the task).
If it’s something pretty much anyone would have a decent
chance at, use the untrained DC. If it would require a degree
of training, use the DC listed for trained, expert, master, or
legendary proficiency, as appropriate to the complexity of the
task. For example, say a PC was trying to uncover the true
history behind a fable. You determine this requires a check
to Recall Knowledge, and that only someone with master
proficiency in Folktale Lore would know the information,
so you’d set the DC at 30—the simple master DC.
Simple DCs work well when you need a DC on the fly
and there’s no level associated with the task. They’re most
useful for skill checks. Because there isn’t much gradation
between the simple DCs, they don’t work as well for
hazards or combatants, where the PCs’ lives are on the line;
you’re better off using level-based DCs for such challenges.
TABLE 10–4: SIMPLE DCS
Proficiency Rank DC
Untrained 10
Trained 15
Expert 20
Master 30
Legendary 40
Level-Based DCs
When you’re determining a skill DC based on something
that has a level, use Table 10–5 to set the DC. Find the
level of the subject, and assign the corresponding DC. Since
spells use a 1–10 scale, use the Spell Level column for them.
Use these DCs when a PC needs to Identify a Spell or
Recall Knowledge about a creature, attempts to Earn
Income by performing a task of a certain level, and so
on. You can also use the level-based DCs for obstacles
instead of assigning a simple DC. For example, you
might determine that a wall in a high-level dungeon was
constructed of smooth metal and is hard to climb. You
could simply say only someone with master proficiency
could climb it, and use the simple DC of 30. Or you
might decide that the 15th-level villain who created the
dungeon crafted the wall, and use the 15th-level DC of
34. Either approach is reasonable!
Note that PCs who invest in a skill become more likely
to succeed at a DC of their level as they increase in level,
and the listed DCs eventually become very easy for them.
TABLE 10–5: DCS BY LEVEL
Level DC Level DC
0 14 13 31
1 15 14 32
2 16 15 34
3 18 16 35
4 19 17 36
5 20 18 38
6 22 19 39
7 23 20 40
8 24 21 42
9 26 22 44
10 27 23 46
11 28 24 48
12 30 25 50
 Spell Level* DC
 1st 15
 2nd 18
 3rd 20
 4th 23
 5th 26
 6th 28
 7th 31
 8th 34
 9th 36
 10th 39
* If a spell is uncommon or rare, its difficulty should be
adjusted accordingly.
Adjusting Difficulty
You might decide a DC should differ from the baseline,
whether to account for PCs’ areas of expertise or to
represent the rarity of spells or items. A DC adjustment
represents an essential difference in the difficulty of a task
and applies to anyone attempting a specific check for it.
Adjustments happen most often with tasks whose DCs
are based on their level. Adjustments use a scale of –10
to +10, from incredibly easy checks to incredibly hard
Difficulty Classes
As the Game Master, it’s up to you to set the difficulty classes (DCs) for checks that don’t
use a predefined DC. The following sections offer advice on how to set appropriate DCs
and tweak them as needed to feel natural for your story. Picking a simple DC and using a
level-based DC each work well in certain circumstances, and you can adjust both types of
DC using the advice on adjusting difficulty.
GAME MASTERING
503
10
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
ones, and are broken into increments of 2, 5, and 10.
You’ll often apply the adjustments for uncommon, rare,
or unique subjects.
TABLE 10–6: DC ADJUSTMENTS
Difficulty Adjustment Rarity
Incredibly easy –10 —
Very easy –5 —
Easy –2 —
Hard +2 Uncommon
Very hard +5 Rare
Incredibly hard +10 Unique
The adjustments’ names don’t translate to how hard a
task actually is for a PC or group of PCs, and adjustments
aren’t meant to balance out or replace PCs’ bonuses and
penalties. PCs who invest in a skill will become better and
better at that skill as they increase in level. For example, even
the best 1st-level PC has grim odds against an incredibly
hard 1st-level DC, with a huge chance of critical failure, but
by 20th level, an optimized character with a modicum of
magic or assistance can take down incredibly hard 20thlevel DCs over half the time, critically failing only on a 1. At
higher levels, many groups will find that the very hard DC is
more like standard for them; keep that in mind if you need
a check that presents a true challenge to a high level group.
You might use different DCs for a task based on the
particular skill or statistic used for the check. Let’s say
your PCs encounter a magical tome about aberrant
creatures. The tome is 4th-level and has the occult trait,
so you set the DC of an Occultism check to Identify the
Magic to 19, based on Table 10–5. As noted in Identify
Magic, other magic-related skills can typically be used at
a higher DC, so you might decide the check is very hard
for a character using Arcana and set the DC at 24 for
characters using that skill. If a character in your group
had Aberration Lore, you might determine that it would
be easy or very easy to use that skill and adjust the DC
to 17 or 14. These adjustments aren’t taking the place of
characters’ bonuses, modifiers, and penalties—they are
due to the applicability of the skills being used.
GROUP ATTEMPTS
The DCs in this chapter give an individual character a
strong and increasing chance of success if they have some
proficiency. On occasion, though, you’ll have a task that
only one person in the group needs to succeed at, but that
everyone can attempt. The number of dice being rolled
means that there’s a very high chance at least one of them
will succeed. Most of the time, that’s perfectly fine, but
sometimes you’ll want the task to be a challenge, with
some uncertainty as to whether the party can succeed. In
these cases, make the check very hard, or incredibly hard
if you want it to be particularly difficult or at high levels.
At these DCs, most of the party will probably fail, but
someone will probably still succeed, likely a character who
has heavily invested in the given skill, as is expected for
specialized characters.
Minimum Proficiency
Sometimes succeeding at a particular task requires a
character to have a specific proficiency rank in addition
to a success on the check. Locks and traps often require a
certain proficiency rank to successfully use the Pick a Lock
or Disable a Device actions of Thievery. A character whose
proficiency rank is lower than what’s listed can attempt
the check, but they can’t succeed. You can apply similar
minimum proficiencies to other tasks. You might decide,
for example, that a particular arcane theorem requires
training in Arcana to understand. An untrained barbarian
can’t succeed at the check, but she can still attempt it if she
wants—after all, she needs to have a chance to critically
fail and get erroneous information!
For checks that require a minimum proficiency, keep
the following guidelines in mind. A 2nd-level or lower
task should almost never require expert proficiency,
a 6th-level or lower task should almost never require
master proficiency, and a 14th-level or lower task should
almost never require legendary proficiency. If they did, no
character of the appropriate level could succeed.
Specific Actions
Several parts of this book, most notably Chapter 4: Skills,
state that you as the GM set the DCs for certain checks or
determine other parameters. Here are guidelines for the most
common tasks. Remember that all of these are guidelines,
and you can adjust them as necessary to suit the situation.
CRAFT
When a character Crafts an item, use the item’s level
to determine the DC, applying the adjustments from
Table 10–6 for the item’s rarity if it’s not common. You
might also apply the easy DC adjustment for an item the
crafter has made before. Repairing an item usually uses the
DC of the item’s level with no adjustments, though you
might adjust the DC to be more difficult for an item of a
higher level than the character can Craft.
EARN INCOME
You set the task level when someone tries to Earn Income.
The highest-level task available is usually the same as the
level of the settlement where the character is located. If
you don’t know the settlement’s level, it’s usually 0–1 for a
village, 2–4 for a town, or 5–7 for a city. A PC might need
to travel to a metropolis or capital to find tasks of levels
8-10, and to the largest cities in the world or another plane
to routinely find tasks beyond that. Some locations might
have higher-level tasks available based on the nature of
the settlement. A major port might have higher-level tasks
Core Rulebook
504
for Sailing Lore, a city with a vibrant arts scene might
have higher-level tasks for Performance, and so on. If
someone is trying to use a particularly obscure skill, they
might have trouble finding tasks of an ideal level, or any
at all—no one in most settlements is clamoring for the
expertise of someone with Troll Lore.
Once the PC has decided on a particular level of task
from those available, use the DC for that level from
Table 10–5. You might adjust the DC to be more difficult
if there’s inclement weather during an outdoor job, a
rowdy audience for a performance, or the like.
GATHER INFORMATION
To set the DC to Gather Information, use a simple DC
representing the availability of information about the
subject. Adjust the DC upward if the PC Gathering
Information seeks in-depth information. For example,
if a character wants to Gather Information about a
visiting caravan, you might decide that a common person
wouldn’t know much about it, but any merchant or guard
would, so learning basic facts uses the simple DC for
trained proficiency. A caravan leader’s name is superficial,
so discovering it might be DC 15 (the simple trained
DC in Table 10–4). Learning the identity of the leader’s
employers, however, might be DC 20 if the employers are
more obscure.
IDENTIFY MAGIC OR LEARN A SPELL
The DC to Identify Magic or Learn a Spell is usually
the DC listed in Table 10–5 for the spell or item’s level,
adjusted for its rarity. A very strange item or phenomenon
usually uses a higher DC adjustment. For a cursed item
or certain illusory items, use an incredibly hard DC to
increase the chance of misidentification.
RECALL KNOWLEDGE
On most topics, you can use simple DCs for checks to Recall
Knowledge. For a check about a specific creature, trap, or
other subject with a level, use a level-based DC (adjusting
for rarity as needed). You might adjust the difficulty down,
maybe even drastically, if the subject is especially notorious
or famed. Knowing simple tales about an infamous
dragon’s exploits, for example, might be incredibly easy for
the dragon’s level, or even just a simple trained DC.
Alternative Skills
As noted in the action’s description, a character might
attempt to Recall Knowledge using a different skill than
the ones listed as the default options. If the skill is highly
applicable, like using Medicine to identify a medicinal
tonic, you probably don’t need to adjust the DC. If its
relevance is a stretch, adjust the DC upward as described
in Adjusting Difficulty.
[1/2 swim faster; place anywhere]]
GAME MASTERING
505
10
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Additional Knowledge
Sometimes a character might want to follow up on a check
to Recall Knowledge, rolling another check to discover
more information. After a success, further uses of Recall
Knowledge can yield more information, but you should
adjust the difficulty to be higher for each attempt. Once a
character has attempted an incredibly hard check or failed
a check, further attempts are fruitless—the character has
recalled everything they know about the subject.
Creature Identification
A character who successfully identifies a creature learns
one of its best-known attributes—such as a troll’s
regeneration (and the fact that it can be stopped by acid
or fire) or a manticore’s tail spikes. On a critical success,
the character also learns something subtler, like a demon’s
weakness or the trigger for one of the creature’s reactions.
The skill used to identify a creature usually depends
on that creature’s trait, as shown on Table 10–7, but you
have leeway on which skills apply. For instance, hags are
humanoids but have a strong connection to occult spells
and live outside society, so you might allow a character to
use Occultism to identify them without any DC adjustment,
while Society is harder. Lore skills can also be used to identify
their specific creature. Using the applicable Lore usually has
an easy or very easy DC (before adjusting for rarity).
SENSE DIRECTION
Pick the most appropriate simple DC when someone uses
Survival to Sense Direction. This is usually the trained DC
in normal wilderness, expert in deep forest or underground,
master in featureless or tricky locations, or legendary in
weird or surreal environments on other planes.
SOCIAL SKILLS
When a character uses Deception, Diplomacy,
Intimidation, or Performance to influence or impress
someone whose level or Will DC you don’t know, estimate
the level of the creature and use that DC. A commoner is
usually level 0 or 1. Don’t worry about being exact. It
often makes sense to adjust the DC based on the target’s
attitude for Deception, Diplomacy, or Performance,
making the DC easy for a friendly creature, very easy for
a helpful one, hard for an unfriendly one, or very hard
for a hostile one. You might adjust the DC further or
differently based on the PC’s goal; for instance, the DC to
Request something an indifferent NPC is fundamentally
opposed to might be incredibly hard or impossible, and
it might be easy to convince an unfriendly creature to do
something it already wants to do.
SUBSIST
A simple DC is usually sufficient for the Subsist action, with
a trained DC for a typical situation. Use the disposition of
the environment or city as a guide; an environment with
scarce resources or a city with little tolerance for transience
might require an expert or higher DC.
TRACK
Often when a PC uses Survival to Track, you can pick a
simple DC and adjust it based on the circumstances. For
example, an army is usually easy to track, so you could use
the untrained DC of 10. If the army marched through mud,
you could even adjust this down to DC 5. On the other
hand, if the party pursues a cunning survivalist using Cover
Tracks, you might use their Survival DC as the DC to Track.
TRAIN AN ANIMAL
Train Animal (page 268) allows PCs to teach animals
tricks. Use the level of the animal as the baseline; you can
adjust the DC up if the trick is especially difficult, or down
if the animal is especially domesticated, like a dog.
DETERMINING THE SCOPE OF LORE
Lore skills are one of the most specialized aspects of
Pathfinder, but they require GM oversight, particularly
in determining which Lore subcategories are acceptable
for characters to select. A Lore subcategory represents
a narrow focus, and thus it shouldn’t replace all or even
most of an entire skill, nor should it convey vast swaths
of information. For example, a single Lore subcategory
doesn’t cover all religions—that’s covered by the Religion
skill—but a character could have a Lore subcategory that
covers a single deity. One Lore subcategory won’t cover an
entire country or all of history, but it could cover a city, an
ancient civilization, or one aspect of a modern country, like
Taldan History Lore. A single Lore subcategory couldn’t
cover the entire multiverse, but it could cover a whole
plane other than the Material Plane.
TABLE 10–7: CREATURE IDENTIFICATION SKILLS
Creature Trait Skills
Aberration Occultism
Animal Nature
Astral Occultism
Beast Arcana, Nature
Celestial Religion
Construct Arcana, Crafting
Dragon Arcana
Elemental Arcana, Nature
Ethereal Occultism
Fey Nature
Fiend Religion
Fungus Nature
Humanoid Society
Monitor Religion
Ooze Occultism
Plant Nature
Spirit Occultism
Undead Religion
Core Rulebook
506
Hero Points
Unlike Experience Points and treasure, which stay with a
character, Hero Points are granted and used on a per-session
basis. At the start of a game session, you give out 1 Hero
Point to each player character. You can also give out more
Hero Points during the game, typically after a heroic
moment or accomplishment (see below). As noted on page
467, a player can spend 1 Hero Point for a reroll, or they
can spend all their Hero Points to recover when near death.
In a typical game, you’ll hand out about 1 Hero Point
during each hour of play after the first (for example, 3
extra points in a 4-hour session). If you want a more overthe-top game, or if your group is up against incredible
odds and showing immense bravery, you might give them
out at a faster rate, like 1 every 30 minutes (6 over a
4-hour session). Try to ensure each PC has opportunities
to earn Hero Points, and avoid granting all of the Hero
Points to a single character.
Brave last stands, protecting innocents, and using a
smart strategy or spell to save the day could all earn a
character a Hero Point. Look for those moments when
everybody at the table celebrates or sits back in awe of a
character’s accomplishments; that’s your cue to issue that
character a Hero Point.
The party could also gain Hero Points for their
accomplishments throughout the game. For a moderate
or major accomplishment, consider giving out a Hero
Point as well. This point typically goes to a PC who was
instrumental in attaining that accomplishment.
Experience Points
As characters adventure, they earn Experience Points (XP).
These awards come from achieving goals, completing
social encounters, exploring new places, fighting monsters,
overcoming hazards, and other sorts of deeds. You have
a great deal of control over when the characters gain XP,
though the following guidelines are what you’re expected
to give out in a standard campaign.
Normally, when a player character reaches 1,000 XP
or more, they level up, reduce their XP by 1,000, and
start progressing toward the next level. Other means of
advancement are described in the Advancement Speeds
sidebar on page 509.
XP AWARDS
Experience Points are awarded for encounters, exploration,
and progress in an adventure. When the PCs face direct
opposition, such as a fight or a social conflict, the XP
earned is based on the level of the challenge the party
overcame. Characters can also gain XP from exploration,
such as finding secret areas, locating a hideout, enduring
a dangerous environment, or mapping an entire dungeon.
Any XP awarded goes to all members of the group. For
instance, if the party wins a battle worth 100 XP, they
each get 100 XP, even if the party’s rogue was off in a
vault stealing treasure during the battle. But if the rogue
collected a splendid and famous gemstone, which you’ve
decided was a moderate accomplishment worth 30 XP,
each member of the party gets 30 XP, too.
Adversaries and Hazards
Encounters with adversaries and hazards grant a set
amount of XP. When the group overcomes an encounter
with creatures or hazards, each character gains XP equal to
the total XP of the creatures and hazards in the encounter
(this excludes XP adjustments for different party sizes; see
Party Size on page 508 for details).
Trivial encounters don’t normally grant any XP, but
you might decide to award the same XP as for a minor or
moderate accomplishment for a trivial encounter that was
important to the story, or for an encounter that became
trivial because of the order in which the PCs encountered
it in a nonlinear adventure.
Accomplishments
Characters’ actions that move the story forward—like
securing a major alliance, establishing an organization,
or causing an NPC to have a change of heart—are
considered accomplishments and should be rewarded
with XP. Their significance determines the size of the
XP award. Determine whether the achievement was a
minor, moderate, or major accomplishment, and refer
to Table  10–8: XP Awards on page 508 to award an
appropriate amount of XP. Minor accomplishments
include all sorts of significant, memorable, or surprising
moments in the game. A moderate accomplishment
typically represents a goal that takes most of a session
to complete, and a major accomplishment is usually
the culmination of the characters’ efforts across many
sessions. Moderate and major accomplishments usually
come after heroic effort, so that’s an ideal time to also give
a Hero Point to one or more of the characters involved.
As mentioned earlier, it’s up to you how much XP to
give out for accomplishments. As a general guideline, in
a given game session, you’ll typically give several minor
awards, one or two moderate awards, and only one
major award, if any.
Rewards
In Pathfinder, player characters can receive three kinds of rewards for their heroic deeds:
Hero Points, which they can use to get out of sticky situations; Experience Points, which
they’ll use to level up; and treasure, including powerful magic items.
GAME MASTERING
507
10
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
TABLE 10–8: XP AWARDS
Accomplishment XP Award
Minor 10 XP
Moderate* 30 XP
Major* 80 XP
* Typically earns a Hero Point as well.
Adversary Level XP Award
Party level – 4 10 XP
Party level – 3 15 XP
Party level – 2 20 XP
Party level – 1 30 XP
Party level 40 XP
Party level + 1 60 XP
Party level + 2 80 XP
Party level + 3 120 XP
Party level + 4 160 XP

XP Award
Hazard Level Simple Hazard Complex Hazard
Party level – 4 2 XP 10 XP
Party level – 3 3 XP 15 XP
Party level – 2 4 XP 20 XP
Party level – 1 6 XP 30 XP
Party level 8 XP 40 XP
Party level + 1 12 XP 60 XP
Party level + 2 16 XP 80 XP
Party level + 3 24 XP 120 XP
Party level + 4 32 XP 160 XP
PARTY SIZE
The rules for advancement assume a group of four PCs.
The rules for encounters (page 489) describe how to
accommodate groups of a different size, but the XP awards
don’t change—always award the amount of XP listed for a
group of four characters. You usually won’t need to make
many adjustments for a differently sized group outside of
encounters. Be careful of providing too many ways to get
accomplishment XP when you have a large group, though,
since they can pursue multiple accomplishments at once,
which can lead to the PCs leveling up too fast.
GROUP PARITY AND PARTY LEVEL
It’s recommended that you keep all the player characters
at the same XP total. This makes it much easier to know
what challenges are suitable for your players. Having
characters at different levels can mean weaker characters
die more easily and their players feel less effective, which
in turn makes the game less fun for those players.
If you choose not to keep the whole group at the same
character level, you’ll need to select a party level to determine
your XP budget for encounters. Choose the level you think
best represents the party’s ability as a whole. Use the highest
level if only one or two characters are behind, or an average
if everyone is at a different level. If only one character is
two or more levels ahead, use a party level suitable for the
lower-level characters, and adjust the encounters as if there
were one additional PC for every 2 levels the higher-level
character has beyond the rest of the party.
Party members who are behind the party level gain
double the XP other characters do until they reach the
party’s level. When tracking individually, you’ll need to
decide whether party members get XP for missed sessions.
Treasure
As the GM, it’s your job to distribute treasure to the player
characters. Treasure appears throughout an adventure,
and the PCs obtain it by raiding treasure hoards, defeating
foes who carry valuable items or currency, getting paid
for successful quests, and any other way you can imagine.
This section provides guidelines for distributing treasure
in a typical Pathfinder campaign, but you always have
the freedom to assign extra treasure for a high-powered
game, less treasure for a gritty survival horror adventure,
or any amount in between.
TREASURE BY LEVEL
Table 10–9: Party Treasure by Level on the next page shows
how much treasure you should give out over the course of a
level for a group of four PCs. The Total Value column gives
an approximate total value of all the treasure, in case you
want to spend it like a budget. The next several columns
provide suggestions for breaking down that total into
permanent items, which the PCs keep and use for a long
time; consumables, which are destroyed after being used
once; and currency, which includes coins, gems, and other
valuables primarily spent to acquire items or services. The
final column gives the amount of currency to add for each
PC beyond four in the group; use this only if you have more
than four characters in the game. (Different Party Sizes on
page 510 provides more guidance on this.)
For instance, between the time your PCs reach 3rd
level and the time they reach 4th level, you should give
them the treasure listed in the table for 3rd level, worth
approximately 500 gp: two 4th-level permanent items, two
3rd-level permanent items, two 4th-level consumables, two
3rd-level consumables, two 2nd-level consumables, and
120 gp worth of currency.
When assigning 1st-level permanent items, your best
options are armor, weapons, and other gear from Chapter 6
worth between 10 and 20 gp. The treasure listed in the row
for 20th level represents a full level’s worth of adventures,
even though there is no way to reach 21st level.
Some creature entries in the Pathfinder Bestiary list
treasure that can be gained by defeating an individual
creature; this counts toward the treasure for any given level.
Published adventures include a suitable amount of treasure
throughout the adventure, though you should still monitor
the party’s capabilities as the PCs progress through the
adventure to make sure they don’t end up behind.
Core Rulebook
508
ADVANCEMENT SPEEDS
By varying the amount of XP it takes to gain a level, you
can change how quickly characters gain power. The game
rules assume a group playing with standard advancement.
Fast advancement works best when you know you won’t
be playing a very long campaign and want to accomplish
as much as possible quickly; slow advancement works
best for a gritty campaign where all progress is hard won.
You can alter XP from one adventure to the next to get
a different feel. During a street-level murder mystery and
travel through a haunted wilderness, you might use slow
advancement. When the PCs reach the dungeon, you might
switch to standard or fast advancement. The values below
are just examples. You can use values even higher or lower.
Advancement Speed XP to Level Up
 Fast 800 XP
 Standard 1,000 XP
 Slow 1,200 XP
Story-Based Leveling
If you don’t want to deal with managing and handing out
XP, or if you want to have progression based solely on
events in the story, you can ignore the XP process entirely
and instead simply decide when the characters level up.
Generally, the characters should gain a level every three
to four game sessions, just after the most appropriate big
event that happens during that time, such as defeating a
significant villain or achieving a major goal.
Currency
A party will find money and other treasure that isn’t
useful on its own but that can be sold or spent on other
things. The gp values in the Party Currency column don’t
refer only to coins. Gems, art objects, crafting materials
(including precious materials), jewelry, and even items of
much lower level than the party’s level can all be more
interesting than a pile of gold.
If you include a lower-level permanent item as part of a
currency reward, count only half the item’s Price toward
the gp amount, assuming the party will sell the item or use
it as crafting material. But lower-level consumables might
still be useful, particularly scrolls, and if you think your
party will use them, count those items at their full Price.
Other Types of Treasure
Not all treasure has to be items or currency. Crafters can
use the Crafting skill to turn raw materials directly into
items instead of buying those items with coins. Knowledge
can expand a character’s abilities, and formulas make good
treasure for item-crafting characters. A spellcaster might
get access to new spells from an enemy’s spellbook or an
ancient scholar, while a monk might retrain techniques with
rarer ones learned from a master on a remote mountaintop.
Treasure and Rarity
Giving out uncommon and rare items and formulas
can get players more interested in treasure. It’s best to
introduce uncommon items as a reward fairly regularly
but rare items only occasionally. These rewards are
TABLE 10–9: PARTY TREASURE BY LEVEL
 Permanent Items Consumables Currency per
Level Total Value (By Item Level) (By Item Level) Party Currency Additional PC
1 175 gp 2nd: 2, 1st: 2* 2nd: 2, 1st: 3 40 gp 10 gp
2 300 gp 3rd: 2, 2nd: 2 3rd: 2, 2nd: 2, 1st: 2 70 gp 18 gp
3 500 gp 4th: 2, 3rd: 2 4th: 2, 3rd: 2, 2nd: 2 120 gp 30 gp
4 850 gp 5th: 2, 4th: 2 5th: 2, 4th: 2, 3rd: 2 200 gp 50 gp
5 1,350 gp 6th: 2, 5th: 2 6th: 2, 5th: 2, 4th: 2 320 gp 80 gp
6 2,000 gp 7th: 2, 6th: 2 7th: 2, 6th: 2, 5th: 2 500 gp 125 gp
7 2,900 gp 8th: 2, 7th: 2 8th: 2, 7th: 2, 6th: 2 720 gp 180 gp
8 4,000 gp 9th: 2, 8th: 2 9th: 2, 8th: 2, 7th: 2 1,000 gp 250 gp
9 5,700 gp 10th: 2, 9th: 2 10th: 2, 9th: 2, 8th: 2 1,400 gp 350 gp
10 8,000 gp 11th: 2, 10th: 2 11th: 2, 10th: 2, 9th: 2 2,000 gp 500 gp
11 11,500 gp 12th: 2, 11th: 2 12th: 2, 11th: 2, 10th: 2 2,800 gp 700 gp
12 16,500 gp 13th: 2, 12th: 2 13th: 2, 12th: 2, 11th: 2 4,000 gp 1,000 gp
13 25,000 gp 14th: 2, 13th: 2 14th: 2, 13th: 2, 12th: 2 6,000 gp 1,500 gp
14 36,500 gp 15th: 2, 14th: 2 15th: 2, 14th: 2, 13th: 2 9,000 gp 2,250 gp
15 54,500 gp 16th: 2, 15th: 2 16th: 2, 15th: 2, 14th: 2 13,000 gp 3,250 gp
16 82,500 gp 17th: 2, 16th: 2 17th: 2, 16th: 2, 15th: 2 20,000 gp 5,000 gp
17 128,000 gp 18th: 2, 17th: 2 18th: 2, 17th: 2, 16th: 2 30,000 gp 7,500 gp
18 208,000 gp 19th: 2, 18th: 2 19th: 2, 18th: 2, 17th: 2 48,000 gp 12,000 gp
19 355,000 gp 20th: 2, 19th: 2 20th: 2, 19th: 2, 18th: 2 80,000 gp 20,000 gp
20 490,000 gp 20th: 4 20th: 4, 19th: 2 140,000 gp 35,000 gp
* Many 1st-level permanent items should be items from Chapter 6 instead of magic items.
GAME MASTERING
509
10
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
especially compelling when the adventurers get the item
by defeating or outsmarting an enemy who carries an
item that fits their backstory or theme.
Uncommon and rare formulas make great treasure for a
character who Crafts items. Note that if an uncommon or
rare formula is broadly disseminated, it eventually becomes
more common. This can take months or years, but the item
might start showing up in shops all around the world.
Different Item Levels
The levels listed for items on Table 10–9: Party Treasure by
Level aren’t set in stone. You can provide items of slightly
higher or lower level as long as you take into account the
value of the items you hand out. For instance, suppose
you were considering giving a party of 11th-level PCs a
runestone with a fortification rune (with a Price of 2,000 gp)
as one of their 12th-level items, but you realize they’ve had
trouble finding armor in their recent adventures, so you
instead decide to give them a suit of 11th-level +2 resilient
armor (1,400 gp) instead. Since the armor has a lower
Price than the rune, you might also add a 9th-level shadow
rune (650 gp) to make up the difference. The total isn’t
exactly the same, but that’s all right.
However, if you wanted to place a 13th-level permanent
item in a treasure hoard, you could remove two 11thlevel permanent items to make a roughly equivalent
exchange. When you make an exchange upward like this,
be cautious: not only might you introduce an item with
effects that are disruptive at the party’s current level of
play, but you also might give an amazing item to one PC
while other characters don’t gain any new items at all!
If you’re playing in a long-term campaign, you can
spread out the treasure over time. A major milestone can
give extra treasure at one level, followed by a tougher
dungeon with fewer new items at the next level. Check
back occasionally to see whether each PC’s treasure is
comparable to the amount they’d get if they created a
new character at their current level, as described under
Treasure for New Characters below. They should be a bit
higher. but if there’s a significant discrepancy, adjust the
adventure’s upcoming treasure rewards accordingly.
Different Party Sizes
If a party has more than four characters, add the following
for each additional character:
• One permanent item of the party’s level or 1
level higher
• Two consumables, usually one of the party’s level
and one of 1 level higher
• Currency equal to the value in the Currency per
Additional PC column of Table 10–9
If the party has fewer than four characters, you can
subtract the same amount for each missing character,
but since the game is inherently more challenging with a
smaller group that can’t cover all roles as efficiently, you
might consider subtracting less treasure and allowing the
extra gear help compensate for the smaller group size.
TREASURE FOR NEW CHARACTERS
When your new campaign starts at a higher level, a
new player joins an existing group, or a current player’s
character dies and they need a new one, your campaign
will have one or more PCs who don’t start at 1st level. In
these cases, refer to Table 10–10: Character Wealth on the
next page, which shows how many common permanent
items of various levels the PC should have, in addition to
currency. A single item on this table is always a baseline
item. If the player wants armor or a weapon with property
runes, they must buy the property runes separately, and for
armor or a weapon made of a precious material, they must
pay for the precious material separately as well.
These values are for a PC just starting out at the given
level. If the PC is joining a party that has already made
progress toward the next level, consider giving the new
ADJUSTING TREASURE
The treasure you award to the party should be monitored
and adjusted as you play. You might need to give out
treasure you hadn’t originally planned for, especially
if the group bypasses part of an adventure. Keep an
eye on the party’s resources. If they’re running out of
consumables or money, or if they’re having trouble in
combat because their items aren’t up to the task, you can
make adjustments.
This is especially common in adventures that have little
downtime or that take place far from civilization. If the
group goes a long time without being able to purchase or
Craft useful items, the PCs will be flush with coins and
valuables but behind on useful equipment. In a situation
like this, you can either place more useful treasure in the
adventure or introduce NPCs who are willing to trade.
Megadungeons and Sandboxes
Some adventures have an expectation that the player
characters explore where they want and find only what
their skill, luck, and ingenuity afford. Two common
examples of this type of adventure are the sprawling
dungeon with multiple different sections and paths, often
called a megadungeon, and free-form exploration, often
called a sandbox and typically occurring in a wilderness.
If you want to build a free-form adventure like this
where characters are likely to miss at least some of the
treasure, increase the amount of treasure you place. Be
aware, however, that a meticulous group can end up with
more treasure than normal and will have advantages in
later adventures.
For a simple guideline to these situations, increase the
treasure as though there were one more PC in the party.
If the structure is especially loose, especially in sandbox
adventures, you can increase this amount even further.
Core Rulebook
510
character an additional item of their current level. If your
party has kept the treasure of dead or retired PCs and
passed it on to new characters, you might need to give the
new character less than the values on the table or reduce
some of the treasure rewards of the next few adventures.
Item Selection
You should work with the new character’s player to decide
which items their character has. Allow the player to make
suggestions, and if they know what items they want their
character to have, respect their choices unless you believe
those choices will have a negative impact on your game.
At your discretion, you can grant the player character
uncommon or rare items that fit their backstory and
concept, keeping in mind how many items of those rarities
you have introduced into your game. The player can also
spend currency on consumables or lower-level permanent
items, keeping the rest as coinage. As usual, you determine
which items the character can find for purchase.
A PC can voluntarily choose an item that has a lower
level than any or all of the listed items, but they don’t gain
any more currency by doing so.
If you choose, you can allow the player to instead start
with a lump sum of currency and buy whatever common
items they want, with a maximum item level of 1 lower
than the character’s level. This has a lower total value than
the normal allotment of permanent items and currency,
since the player can select a higher ratio of high-level items.
TABLE 10–10: CHARACTER WEALTH
Level Permanent Items Currency Lump Sum
1 — 15 gp 15 gp
2 1st: 1 20 gp 30 gp
3 2nd: 1, 1st: 2 25 gp 75 gp
4 3rd: 1, 2nd: 2, 1st: 1 30 gp 140 gp
5 4th: 1, 3rd: 2, 2nd: 1, 1st: 2 50 gp 270 gp
6 5th: 1, 4th: 2, 3rd: 1, 2nd: 2 80 gp 450 gp
7 6th: 1, 5th: 2, 4th: 1, 3rd: 2 125 gp 720 gp
8 7th: 1, 6th: 2, 5th: 1, 4th: 2 180 gp 1,100 gp
9 8th: 1, 7th: 2, 6th: 1, 5th: 2 250 gp 1,600 gp
10 9th: 1, 8th: 2, 7th: 1, 6th: 2 350 gp 2,300 gp
11 10th: 1, 9th: 2, 8th: 1, 7th: 2 500 gp 3,200 gp
12 11th: 1, 10th: 2, 9th: 1, 8th: 2 700 gp 4,500 gp
13 12th: 1, 11th: 2, 10th: 1, 9th: 2 1,000 gp 6,400 gp
14 13th: 1, 12th: 2, 11th: 1, 10th: 2 1,500 gp 9,300 gp
15 14th: 1, 13th: 2, 12th: 1, 11th: 2 2,250 gp 13,500 gp
16 15th: 1, 14th: 2, 13th: 1, 12th: 2 3,250 gp 20,000 gp
17 16th: 1, 15th: 2, 14th: 1, 13th: 2 5,000 gp 30,000 gp
18 17th: 1, 16th: 2, 15th: 1, 14th: 2 7,500 gp 45,000 gp
19 18th: 1, 17th: 2, 16th: 1, 15th: 2 12,000 gp 69,000 gp
20 19th: 1, 18th: 2, 17th: 1, 16th: 2 20,000 gp 112,000 gp
Buying and Selling Items
Characters can usually buy and sell items only during
downtime. An item can typically be sold for only half its
Price, though art objects, gems, and raw materials can be
sold for their full Price (page 271).
GAME MASTERING
511
10
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Each of the environments presented in this section uses
the terrain rules (which are summarized on page 514
and appear in full beginning on page 475) in different
ways, so be sure to familiarize yourself with those rules
before reading this section. Some environments refer to
the rules for climate (page 517) and natural disasters
(beginning on page 517). Many places have the traits of
multiple environments; a snow-covered mountain might
use both the arctic and mountain environments, for
example. For environmental features with effects based
on how tall or deep they are, those effects vary further
based on a creature’s size. For instance, a shallow bog
for a Medium creature might be a deep bog for smaller
creatures, and a deep bog for a Medium creature could
be only a shallow bog for a larger creature (and so
insignificant for a truly massive creature that it isn’t
even difficult terrain).
Table 10–12 lists the features of various environments
alphabetically for quick reference. The Proficiency DC
Band entry indicates a range of appropriate simple DCs
for that environmental feature, while also providing a
rough estimate of the danger or complexity of the feature.
Environmental Damage
Some environmental features or natural disasters deal
damage. Because the amount of damage can vary based
on the specific circumstances, the rules for specific
environments and natural disasters use damage categories
to describe the damage, rather than exact numbers.
Use Table 10–11 below to determine damage from an
environment or natural disaster. When deciding the exact
damage amount, use your best judgment based on how
extreme you deem the danger to be.
TABLE 10–11: ENVIRONMENTAL DAMAGE
Category Damage
Minor 1d6–2d6
Moderate 4d6–6d6
Major 8d6–12d6
Massive 18d6–24d6
Aquatic
Aquatic environments are among the most challenging
for PCs short of other worlds and unusual planes. PCs in
an aquatic environment need a way to breathe (typically
a water breathing spell) and must usually Swim to
Environment
Primarily used during exploration, environment rules bring the locales your party
travels through to life. You’ll often be able to use common sense to adjudicate how
environments work, but you’ll need special rules for environments that really stand out.
move, though a PC who sinks to the bottom can walk
awkwardly, using the rules for greater difficult terrain.
Characters in aquatic environments make frequent use
of the aquatic combat (page 478) and drowning and
suffocation rules (page 478).
Currents and Flowing Water
Ocean currents, flowing rivers, and similar moving water
are difficult terrain or greater difficult terrain (depending
on the speed of the water) for a creature Swimming against
the current. At the end of a creature’s turn, it moves a
certain distance depending on the current’s speed. For
instance, a 10-foot current moves a creature 10 feet in
the current’s direction at the end of that creature’s turn.
Visibility
It’s much harder to see things at a distance underwater
than it is on land, and it’s particularly difficult if the water
is murky or full of particles. In pure water, the maximum
visual range is roughly 240 feet to see a small object, and
in murky water, visibility can be reduced to only 10 feet
or even less.
Arctic
The main challenge in an arctic environment is the low
temperature, but arctic environments also contain ice
and snow. The disasters that most often strike in arctic
environments are avalanches, blizzards, and floods.
Ice
Icy ground is both uneven ground and difficult terrain, as
characters slip and slide due to poor traction.
Snow
Depending on the depth of snow and its composition,
most snowy ground is either difficult terrain or greater
difficult terrain. In denser snow, characters can attempt
to walk along the surface without breaking through, but
some patches might be loose or soft enough that they’re
uneven ground.
Desert
Desert encompasses sandy and rocky deserts as well
as badlands. Though tundra is technically a desert, it’s
classified as arctic, as the climate is the primary challenge
in such areas. Sandy deserts often have quicksand hazards
(page 526) and sandstorms.
Core Rulebook
512
TABLE 10–12: ENVIRONMENTAL FEATURES
Feature Pages Proficiency DC Band
Avalanche 518 Expert–legendary
Blizzard 518 —
Bog 514 Untrained–trained
Canopy 513 Trained–master
Chasm 513 —
Cliff 513 Trained–master
Collapse 518 Expert–legendary
Crowd 514 Trained–master
Current 512 Trained–master
Door 515 See page 515
Earthquake 518 Trained–legendary
Flood 518 Expert–legendary
Floor 515, 516 Untrained–expert
Fog 517 —
Gate 515 —
Guard 515 —
Hedge 514 Untrained–trained
Ice 512 Trained–master
Lava 519 Expert–legendary
Ledge 516 Untrained–master
Portcullis 515 See page 515
Precipitation 517 —
Rooftop 515 Trained–master
Rubble 513, 516 Untrained–expert
Sand 513 Untrained–expert
Sandstorm 519 Trained–master
Sewer 515 —
Slope 514 Untrained–trained
Snow 512 Untrained–expert
Stairs 516 Untrained–trained
Stalagmite 516 Trained–expert
Street 516 Untrained–trained
Temperature 517 —
Tornado 519 Master–legendary
Tree 513 Untrained–master
Tsunami 519 Master–legendary
Undergrowth 513, 514 Untrained–expert
Underwater Visibility 512 —
Volcanic Eruption 519 Trained–legendary
Wall 517 See page 516
Wildfire 519 Expert–legendary
Wind 517 Untrained–legendary
Rubble
Rocky deserts are strewn with rubble, which is difficult
terrain. Rubble dense enough to be walked over rather
than navigated through is uneven ground.
Sand
Packed sand doesn’t usually significantly impede a
character’s movement, but loose sand is either difficult
terrain (if it’s shallow) or uneven ground (if it’s deep).
The wind in a desert often shifts sand into dunes, hills
of loose sand with uneven ground facing the wind and
steeper inclines away from the wind.
Forest
These diverse environments include jungles and other
wooded areas. They are sometimes struck by wildfires.
Canopies
Particularly dense forests, such as rain forests, have a
canopy level above the ground. A creature trying to reach
the canopy or travel along it must Climb. Swinging on
vines and branches usually requires an Acrobatics or
Athletics check. A canopy provides cover, and a thicker
one can prevent creatures in the canopy from seeing those
on the ground, and vice versa.
Trees
While trees are omnipresent in a forest, they typically
don’t provide cover unless a character uses the Take
Cover action. Only larger trees that take up an entire
5-foot square on the map (or more) are big enough to
provide cover automatically.
Undergrowth
Light undergrowth is difficult terrain that allows a
character to Take Cover. Heavy undergrowth is greater
difficult terrain that automatically provides cover. Some
sorts of undergrowth, such as thorns, might also be
hazardous terrain, and areas with plenty of twisting roots
might be uneven ground.
Mountain
Mountain environments also include hills, which share
many aspects of mountains, though not their more extreme
features. The most common disasters here are avalanches.
Chasms
Chasms are natural pits, typically at least 20 feet long
and clearly visible (barring mundane or magical efforts to
conceal them). The main danger posed by a chasm is that
characters must Long Jump to get across. Alternatively,
characters can take the safer but slower route of Climbing
down the near side of the chasm and then ascending the
far side to get across.
Cliffs
Cliffs and rock walls require creatures to Climb to
ascend or descend. Without extensive safety precautions,
a critical failure can result in significant falling damage.
Rubble
Mountains often have extremely rocky areas or shifting,
gravelly scree that makes for difficult terrain. Especially
deep or pervasive rubble is uneven ground.
GAME MASTERING
513
10
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Slopes
Slopes vary from the gentle rises of normal terrain
to difficult terrain and inclines, depending on the
angle of elevation. Moving down a slope is typically
normal terrain, but characters might need to Climb up
particularly steep slopes.
Undergrowth
Light undergrowth is common in mountains. It is difficult
terrain and allows a character to Take Cover.
Plains
The plains environment encompasses grasslands such as
savannas and farmland. The most common disasters in
plains are tornadoes and wildfires.
Hedges
Hedges are planted rows of bushes, shrubs, and trees.
Their iconic appearance in adventures consists of tall
hedges grown into mazes. A typical hedge is 2 to 5 feet
tall, takes up a row of squares, and provides cover. A
character trying to push through a hedge faces greater
difficult terrain; it’s sometimes faster to Climb over.
Undergrowth
Light undergrowth is difficult terrain that allows a
character to Take Cover. Heavy undergrowth is greater
difficult terrain that provides cover automatically.
Undergrowth in plains is usually light with a few scattered
areas of heavy undergrowth, but fields of certain crops,
like corn, are entirely heavy undergrowth.
Swamp
Wetlands are the most common kind of swamp, but
this category also includes drier marshes such as moors.
Swamps often contain quicksand hazards (page  526).
Despite their soggy nature, swamps aren’t very likely
to experience heavy flooding, since they act as natural
sponges and absorb a great deal of water before
they flood.
Bogs
Also called mires, bogs are watery areas that accumulate
peat, are covered by shrubs and moss, and sometimes
feature floating islands of vegetation covering deeper pools.
Shallow bogs are difficult terrain for a Medium creature,
and deep bogs are greater difficult terrain. If a bog is deep
enough that a creature can’t reach the bottom, the creature
has to Swim. Bogs are also acidic, so particularly extreme
or magical bogs can be hazardous terrain.
Undergrowth
Light undergrowth is difficult terrain that allows a
character to Take Cover, while heavy undergrowth is
greater difficult terrain that provides cover automatically.
Some sorts of undergrowth, such as thorns, are also
hazardous terrain, and areas with plenty of twisting roots
are uneven ground.
Urban
Urban environments include open city spaces as well as
buildings. The building information in this section also
applies to ruins and constructed dungeons. Depending on
their construction and location, cities might be vulnerable
to many sorts of disasters, especially fires and floods.
Crowds
Crowded thoroughfares and similar areas are difficult
terrain, or greater difficult terrain if an area is truly packed
with people. You might allow a character to get a crowd to
part using Diplomacy, Intimidation, or Performance.
A crowd exposed to an obvious danger, like a fire or
a rampaging monster, attempts to move away from the
danger as quickly as possible, but it is slowed by its own
mass. A fleeing crowd typically moves at the Speed of an
average member each round (usually 25 feet), potentially
trampling or leaving behind slower-moving members of
the crowd.
TERRAIN RULES
Environments make frequent use of the rules for difficult
terrain, greater difficult terrain, and hazardous terrain, so
those rules are summarized here.
Difficult terrain is any terrain that impedes movement,
ranging from particularly rough or unstable surfaces to
thick ground cover and countless other impediments.
Moving into a square of difficult terrain (or moving 5
feet into or within an area of difficult terrain, if you’re
not using a grid) costs an extra 5 feet of movement.
Moving into a square of greater difficult terrain instead
costs 10 additional feet of movement. This additional
cost is not increased when moving diagonally. Creatures
can’t normally Step into difficult terrain.
Any movement creatures make while jumping
ignores terrain that the creature is jumping over.
Some abilities (such as flight or being incorporeal)
allow creatures to avoid the movement reduction from
some types of difficult terrain. Certain other abilities
let creatures ignore difficult terrain while traveling on
foot; such an ability also allows a creature to move
through greater difficult terrain using the movement
cost for difficult terrain, but unless the ability
specifies otherwise, these abilities don’t let creatures
ignore greater difficult terrain.
Hazardous terrain damages creatures whenever
they move through it. For instance, an acid pool, a pit
of burning embers, and a spike-filled passageway all
constitute hazardous terrain. The amount and type of
damage depend on the specific hazardous terrain.
Core Rulebook
514
Doors
Opening an unlocked door requires an Interact action
(or more than one for a particularly complicated or large
door). Stuck doors must be Forced Open, and locked ones
require a character to Pick the Lock or Force them Open.
Floors
Wooden floors are easy to walk on, as are flagstone floors
made of fitted stones. However, floors of worn flagstone
often contain areas of uneven ground.
Gates
Walled settlements often have gates that the city can close
for defense or open to allow travel. A typical gate consists
of one portcullis at each end of a gatehouse, with murder
holes in between or other protected spots from which
guards can attack foes.
Guards
Most settlements of significant size have guards working
in shifts to protect the settlement at all hours, patrolling
the streets and guarding various posts. The size of this
force varies from one guard for every 1,000 residents to a
force 10 times this number.
Portcullises
A portcullis is a wooden or iron grate that descends
to seal off a gate or corridor. Most are raised on ropes
or chains operated by a winch, and they have locking
mechanisms that keep them from being lifted easily. The
rules on lifting a portcullis or bending its bars appear in
the sidebar on this page. If a portcullis falls on a creature,
use a slamming door trap (page 523).
Rooftops
Rooftops make for memorable ambushes, chase scenes,
infiltrations, and running fights. Flat roofs are easy
to move across, but they’re rare in any settlement that
receives significant snowfall, since heavy buildups of snow
can collapse a roof. Angled roofs are uneven ground, or
inclines if they’re especially steep. The peak of an angled
roof is a narrow surface.
Hurdling from roof to roof often requires a Long Jump,
though some buildings are close enough to Leap between.
A High Jump might be necessary to reach a higher roof, or
a Leap followed by Grabbing an Edge and Climbing up.
Sewers
Sewers are generally 10 feet or more below street level
and are equipped with ladders or other means to ascend
and  descend. Raised paths along the walls allow sewer
workers access, while channels in the center carry the waste
itself. Less sophisticated sewers, or sections those workers
don’t usually access, might require wading through diseaseridden waste. Sewers can be accessed through sewer grates,
which usually require 2 or more Interact actions to open.
DOORS, GATES, AND WALLS
Some of the most common obstacles that characters
face in urban areas and dungeons are doors, gates,
and walls.
Climbing
The table below gives the typical DC for Athletics checks
to Climb a structure, which is usually a simple DC. You
might adjust the difficulty based on the specifics of the
structure and environment.
Demolishing
A character might want to smash their way through
a door, a window, or certain walls. The Hardness, Hit
Point, and Broken Threshold values provided in the table
below are based on the material the structure is typically
made out of, so a portcullis made of iron, for example,
has a higher Hardness than one of wood. For more on
damaging objects, see page 272.
Strong walls, such as well-maintained masonry
or hewn stone, can’t be broken without dedicated
work and proper tools. Getting through such walls
requires downtime.
Door Climb DC Hardness, HP (BT)
Wood 20 10, 40 (20)
Stone 30 14, 56 (28)
Reinforced wood 15 15, 60 (30)
Iron 30 18, 72 (36)
Wall Climb DC Hardness, HP (BT)
Crumbling masonry 15 10, 40 (20)
Wooden slats 15 10, 40 (20)
Masonry 20 14, 56 (28)
Hewn stone 30 14, 56 (28)
Iron 40 18, 72 (36)
Portcullis Climb DC Hardness, HP (BT)
Wood 10 10, 40 (20)
Iron 10 18, 72 (36)
Forcing Open
Structures that can be opened—such as doors, gates, and
windows—can be Forced Open using Athletics. This is
usually necessary only if they’re locked or stuck. The DC
to Force Open a structure uses the Thievery DC of its lock
but adjusts it to be very hard (increasing the DC by 5).
If there’s no lock, use the following table; when lifting
a portcullis, use the lock DC or the DC from the table,
whichever is higher.
Structure Force Open DC
Stuck door or window 15
Exceptionally stuck 20
Lift wooden portcullis 20
Lift iron portcullis 30
Bend metal bars 30
GAME MASTERING
515
10
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Sewer Gas
Sewer gas often contains pockets of highly flammable
gas. A pocket of sewer gas exposed to a source of flame
explodes, dealing moderate environmental fire damage to
creatures in the area.
Stairs
Stairs are difficult terrain for characters moving up them,
and shoddy stairs might also be uneven ground. Some
temples and giant-built structures have enormous stairs
that are greater difficult terrain both up and down, or
might require Climbing every step.
Streets
Most settlements have narrow and twisting streets that
were largely established organically as the settlement
grew. These roads are rarely more than 20 feet wide, with
alleys as narrow as 5 feet. Streets are generally paved with
cobblestones. If the cobblestones are in poor repair, they
could be difficult terrain or uneven ground.
Particularly lawful or well-planned cities have major
thoroughfares that allow wagons and merchants to reach
marketplaces and other important areas in town. These
need to be at least 25 feet wide to accommodate wagons
moving in both directions, and they often have narrow
sidewalks that allow pedestrians to avoid wagon traffic.
Walls
Well-built structures have exterior walls of brick or
stonemasonry. Smaller, lower-quality, or temporary
structures might have wooden walls. Interior walls tend
to be less sturdy; they could be made of wooden planks,
or even simply of thick, opaque paper held in a wooden
frame. An underground structure might have thick
walls carved out of solid rock to prevent the weight of
the ground above from collapsing the structure. Rules
for climbing and breaking walls are in the sidebar on
page 515.
Underground
Underground environments consist of caves and natural
underground areas. Artificial dungeons and ruins combine
underground features with urban features like stairs and
walls. Deep underground vaults have some of the same
terrain features as mountains, such as chasms and cliffs.
The most common disasters underground are collapses.
Floors
Natural underground environments rarely have flat floors,
instead featuring abrupt changes in elevation that result in
difficult terrain, uneven ground, and inclines.
Ledges
Ledges are narrow surfaces that overlook a lower area
or provide the only means to move along the edge of
a chasm. Moving across a narrow ledge requires using
Acrobatics to Balance.
Rubble
Caverns can be covered in rubble, which is
difficult terrain. Deep or pervasive rubble is
also uneven ground.
Stalagmites and Stalactites
Stalagmites are tapering columns that
rise from the floor of a cave. Areas
filled with stalagmites are greater
difficult terrain, and especially large
stalagmites have to be sidestepped
or Climbed. Stalagmites can
be sharp enough they can be
Core Rulebook
516
used as hazardous terrain in some circumstances, as can
stalactites (icicle-shaped formations that hang from the
roof of a cave) if they’re knocked loose from a ceiling
or overhang.
Walls
Natural cave walls are uneven, with nooks, crannies,
and ledges. Since most caves are formed by water, cave
walls are often damp, making them even more difficult
to Climb.
Climate
Weather is more than just set dressing to establish
mood—it has mechanical effects you can combine with
environmental components to create a more memorable
encounter. Weather can impose circumstance penalties
on certain checks, from –1 to –4 based on severity.
Fog
Fog imposes a circumstance penalty to visual Perception
checks, depending on the thickness; it causes creatures
viewed through significant amounts of fog to be
concealed; and it cuts off all visibility at half a mile or
less—possibly much less. Conditions limiting visibility
to about a mile are called mist, and those that do so to
about 3 miles are called haze.
Precipitation
Precipitation includes rain as well as colder snow, sleet,
and hail. Wet precipitation douses flames, and frozen
precipitation can create areas of snow or ice on the
ground. Drizzle or light snowfall has little mechanical
effect beyond limited visibility.
Visibility
Most forms of precipitation impose circumstance
penalties on visual Perception checks. Hail often is sparser
but loud, instead penalizing auditory Perception checks.
Especially heavy precipitation, such as a downpour of
rain or heavy snow, might make creatures concealed if
they’re far away.
Fatigue
Precipitation causes discomfort and fatigue. Anything
heavier than drizzle or light snowfall reduces the
time it takes for characters to become fatigued from
overland travel to only 4 hours. Heavy precipitation
can be dangerous in cold environments when characters
go without protection. Soaked characters treat the
temperature as one step colder (mild to severe, severe to
extreme; see Temperature below).
Thunderstorms
High winds and heavy precipitation accompany
many thunderstorms. There’s also a very small chance
that a character might be struck by lightning during
a storm. A lightning strike usually deals moderate
electricity damage, or major electricity damage in a
severe thunderstorm.
Temperature
Often, temperature doesn’t impose enough of a
mechanical effect to worry about beyond describing the
clothing the characters need to wear to be comfortable.
Particularly hot and cold weather can make creatures
fatigued more quickly during overland travel and can
cause damage if harsh enough, as shown in Table 10–13
on page 518.
Appropriate cold-weather gear (such as the winter
clothing) can negate the damage from severe cold
or reduce the damage from extreme cold to that of
particularly severe cold.
Wind
Wind imposes a circumstance penalty on auditory
Perception checks depending on its strength. It also
interferes with physical ranged attacks such as arrows,
imposing a circumstance penalty to attack rolls involving
such weapons, and potentially making attacks with them
impossible in powerful windstorms. Wind snuffs out
handheld flames; lanterns protect their flame from the
wind, but particularly powerful winds can extinguish
these as well.
Moving in Wind
Wind is difficult or greater difficult terrain when Flying.
Moving in wind of sufficient strength requires a Maneuver
in Flight action, and fliers are blown away on a critical
failure or if they don’t succeed at a minimum of one such
check each round.
Even on the ground, particularly strong winds might
require a creature to succeed at an Athletics check to
move, knocking the creature back and prone on a critical
failure. On such checks, Small creatures typically take a
–1 circumstance penalty, and Tiny creatures typically take
a –2 penalty.
DUNGEONS
Dungeon environments, which include both ruins and
contemporary buildings constructed in the wilderness,
are a fairly common venue for adventures. As an
environment, they combine urban features like doors and
buildings (page 515) with features from an underground
environment, and occasionally components from
other environments. While underground dungeons are
particularly common, you might also consider setting
your adventure in a ruin reclaimed by the forest, with
giant trees spreading their roots through the walls, or a
ruin deep in a swamp, with bogs covering access to some
of the ruin’s hidden secrets.
GAME MASTERING
517
10
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Natural Disasters
Climate and environmental features can be a hindrance
or long-term threat, but natural disasters represent acute
danger, especially to those directly exposed to their fury.
The damage in the following sections uses the categories in
Table 10–11: Environmental Damage on page 512.
Avalanches
Though the term avalanche specifically refers to a
cascading flow of ice and snow down a mountain’s slope,
the same rules work for landslides, mudslides, and other
similar disasters. Avalanches of wet snow usually travel
up to 200 feet per round, though powdery snow can
travel up to 10 times faster. Rockslides and mudslides
are slower, sometimes even slow enough that a character
might be able to outrun them.
An avalanche deals major or even massive
bludgeoning damage to creatures and objects in its path.
These victims are also buried under a significant mass.
Creatures caught in an avalanche’s path can attempt
a Reflex save; if they succeed, they take only half the
bludgeoning damage, and if they critically succeed, they
also avoid being buried.
Burial
Buried creatures take minor bludgeoning damage each
minute, and they potentially take minor cold damage
if buried under an avalanche of snow. At the GM’s
discretion, creatures without a sufficient air pocket could
also risk suffocation (page 478). A buried creature is
restrained and usually can’t free itself.
Allies or bystanders can attempt to dig out a buried
creature. Each creature digging clears roughly a 5-footby-5-foot square every 4 minutes with a successful
Athletics check (or every 2 minutes on a critical success).
Using shovels or other proper tools halves the time.
Blizzards
Blizzards combine cold weather, heavy snow, and strong
winds. They don’t pose a single direct threat as other
disasters do; instead, the combination of these factors all
at once poses a substantial impediment to characters.
Collapses
Collapses and cave-ins occur when caverns or buildings
fall, dumping tons of rock or other material on those
caught below or inside them. Creatures under the
collapse take major or massive bludgeoning damage and
become buried, just as with an avalanche. Fortunately,
collapses don’t spread unless they weaken the overall
integrity of the area and lead to further collapses.
Earthquakes
Earthquakes often cause other natural disasters in the
form of avalanches, collapses, floods, and tsunamis, but
they also present unique threats such as fissures, soil
liquefaction, and tremors.
Fissures
Fissures and other ground ruptures can destabilize
structures, but more directly they lead to creatures taking
bludgeoning damage from falling into a fissure.
Soil Liquefaction
Liquefaction occurs when granular particles shake to
the point where they temporarily lose their solid form
and act as liquids. When this happens to soil, it can
cause creatures and even whole buildings to sink into
the ground. You can use the earthquake spell for more
specific rules, though that spell represents only one
particular kind of localized quake.
Tremors
Tremors knock creatures prone, causing them to fall or
careen into other objects, which can deal bludgeoning
damage appropriate to the severity of the quake.
Floods
Though more gradual floods can damage structures and
drown creatures, flash floods are similar to avalanches,
except with a liquid mass instead of a solid one. Instead
of burying creatures, a flash flood carries creatures and
even massive objects away, buffeting the creatures and
potentially drowning them. The drowning rules appear
on page 478.
TABLE 10–13: TEMPERATURE EFFECTS
Category Temperature Fatigue Damage
Incredible cold –80º F or colder 2 hours Moderate cold every minute
Extreme cold –79º F to –20º F 4 hours Minor cold every 10 minutes
Severe cold –21º F to 12º F 4 hours Minor cold every hour
Mild cold 13º F to 32º F 4 hours None
Normal 33º F to 94º F 8 hours None
Mild heat 95º F* to 104º F* 4 hours None
Severe heat 105º F* to 114º F 4 hours Minor fire every hour
Extreme heat 115º F to 139º F 4 hours Minor fire every 10 minutes
Incredible heat 140º F or warmer 2 hours Moderate fire every minute
* Adjust temperatures down by 15º in areas of high humidity.
Core Rulebook
518
Sandstorms
Mild sandstorms and dust storms don’t present much
more danger than a windy rainstorm, but they can cause
damage to a creature’s lungs and spread diseases across
long distances. Heavy sandstorms deal minor slashing
damage each round to those exposed to the sand, force
creatures to hold their breath to avoid suffocation,
or both.
Tornadoes
In a tornado’s path, wind conditions impose severe
circumstance penalties, but creatures that would
normally be blown away are instead picked up in the
tornado’s funnel, where they take massive bludgeoning
damage from flying debris as they rise through the cone
until they are eventually expelled (taking bludgeoning
damage from falling).
Tornadoes usually travel around 300 feet per round
(roughly 30 miles per hour). They normally travel a few
miles before dissipating. Some tornadoes are stationary
or travel much faster.
Tsunamis
Tsunamis present many of the same dangers as flash
floods but are much larger and more destructive. Tsunami
waves can reach 100 feet or more in height, wrecking
buildings and creatures alike with massive bludgeoning
damage from both the wave itself and debris pulled up
along its path of destruction.
Volcanic Eruptions
Volcanic eruptions can contain any combination of ash,
lava bombs, lava flows, pyroclastic flows, and vents.
Ash
Ash from volcanic eruptions is hot enough to cause
minor fire damage each minute. It limits visibility like
a thick fog and can make air unbreathable, requiring
characters to hold their breath or suffocate (page 478).
Ash clouds generate ash lightning strikes, which typically
deal moderate electricity damage but are very unlikely
to hit an individual creature. Ash buildup on the ground
creates areas of uneven ground, difficult terrain, or
greater difficult terrain, and ash in the atmosphere can
block the sun for weeks or even months, leading to colder
temperatures and longer winters.
Lava Bombs
Pressure can launch lava into the air that falls as lava
bombs: masses of lava that solidify as they fly and shatter
on impact, dealing at least moderate bludgeoning damage
and moderate fire damage.
Lava Flows
Lava flows are an iconic volcanic threat; they usually
move between 5 and 60 feet per round over normal
ground, so characters can often outrun them. However,
flows can move up to 300 feet per round in a steep
volcanic tube or channel. Lava emanates heat that deals
minor fire damage even before it comes into contact
with creatures, and immersion in lava deals massive fire
damage each round.
Pyroclastic Flows
Mixes of hot gases and rock debris, pyroclastic flows
spread much faster than lava, sometimes more than
4,000 feet per round. While cooler than the hottest lava,
pyroclastic flows are capable of overwhelming entire
settlements. They work like avalanches but deal half of
their damage as fire damage.
Vents
Steam vents shoot from the ground, dealing moderate fire
damage or more in a wide column. Acidic and poisonous
gases released from beneath the surface can create wide
areas of hazardous terrain that deals at least minor acid
or poison damage.
Wildfires
Wildfires travel mainly along a front moving in a single
direction. In a forest, the front can advance up to 70
feet per round (7 miles per hour). They can move up
to twice as fast across plains due to a lack of shade
and the relatively low humidity. Embers from the fire,
carried by winds and rising hot air, can scatter, forming
spot fires as far as 10 miles away from the main
wildfire. Wildfires present three main threats: flames,
heat, and smoke.
Flames
Flames are hazardous terrain, usually dealing moderate
damage and potentially setting a character on fire,
dealing moderate persistent fire damage. The flames from
a small fire are often less dangerous than the advancing
heat from the front of a large fire.
Heat
Wildfires increase the temperature in advance of the front,
reaching nearly 1,500° F at the fire’s arrival, as hot as
some lava. This begins as minor fire damage every round
at a reasonable distance from the front and increases to
massive fire damage for someone within the wildfire.
Smoke
Wind can carry smoke far in front of the wildfire
itself. Smoke imposes a circumstance penalty to visual
Perception checks, depending on the thickness. It causes
creatures viewed through significant amounts of smoke
to be concealed, and it cuts off all visibility at half a mile
or less. Near or within the wildfire, the combination of
smoke and heated air require characters to hold their
breath or suffocate (page 478).
GAME MASTERING
519
10
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Detecting a Hazard
Every hazard has a trigger of some kind that sets its
dangers in motion. For traps, this could be a mechanism
like a trip wire or a pressure plate, while for an
environmental hazard or haunt, the trigger may simply be
proximity. When characters approach a hazard, they have
a chance of finding the trigger area or mechanism before
triggering the hazard. They automatically receive a check
to detect hazards unless the hazards require a minimum
proficiency rank to do so.
During exploration, determine whether the party
detects a hazard when the PCs first enter the general area
in which it appears. If the hazard doesn’t list a minimum
proficiency rank, roll a secret Perception check against
the hazard’s Stealth DC for each PC. For hazards with a
minimum proficiency rank, roll only if someone is actively
searching (using the Search activity while exploring or
the Seek action in an encounter), and only if they have the
listed proficiency rank or higher. Anyone who succeeds
becomes aware of the hazard, and you can describe what
they notice.
Magical hazards that don’t have a minimum proficiency
rank can be found using detect magic, but this spell
doesn’t provide enough information to understand or
disable the hazard—it only reveals the hazard’s presence.
Determining a magical hazard’s properties thoroughly
enough to disable it requires either the use of more
powerful magic or a successful skill check, likely using
Identify Magic or Recall Knowledge. Magical hazards
with a minimum proficiency rank cannot be found with
detect magic at all.
Triggering a Hazard
If the group fails to detect a hazard and the hazard’s
trigger is a standard part of traveling (such as stepping
on a floor plate or moving through a magical sensor
while walking), the hazard’s reaction occurs. Hazards
that would be triggered only when someone directly
manipulates the environment—by opening a door, for
example—use their reactions only if a PC explicitly takes
that action.
Reaction or Free Action
Most hazards have reactions that occur when they’re
triggered. For simple hazards, the reaction is the entirety
of the hazard’s effect. For complex hazards, the reaction
may also cause the hazard to roll initiative, either starting
a combat encounter or joining one already in progress,
and the hazard continues to pose a threat over multiple
rounds. Some hazards have a triggered free action instead
of a reaction; for instance, quicksand can suck down
multiple creatures per round.
Routine
A complex hazard usually follows a set of preprogrammed
actions called a routine. Once triggered, the hazard first
performs its initial reaction; then, if the PCs are not yet
in encounter mode, they should roll initiative. (If they’re
already in encounter mode, their initiative remains
the same.) The hazard might tell you to roll initiative
for it—in this case, the hazard rolls initiative using its
Stealth modifier.
After this happens, the hazard follows its routine each
round on its initiative. The number of actions a hazard
can take each round, as well as what they can be used for,
depend on the hazard.
Resetting a Hazard
Some hazards can be reset, allowing them to be triggered
again. This can occur automatically, as for quicksand,
whose surface settles after 24 hours, or manually, like a
hidden pit, whose trapdoor must be closed for the pit to
become hidden again.
Hazards
Dungeons are rife with devious traps meant to protect the treasures within. These range
from mechanical devices that shoot darts or drop heavy blocks to magic runes that
explode into bursts of flame. In addition to traps, adventurers may stumble into other
types of hazards, including naturally occurring environmental hazards, mysterious
hauntings, and more.
MONSTERS AND HAZARDS
The statistics for NPCs and monsters usually don’t list their
proficiency ranks. Most of the time, they don’t need to deal
with detecting or disabling hazards the way PCs do, so you
don’t need this information. However, if a PC resets a trap
in a monster’s path or plans to lure a monster into a hazard,
you can improvise this information.
For Perception, a monster is usually an expert at 3rd
or 4th level, a master at 8th or 9th level, and legendary
at 16th or 17th level. If the monster has Thievery listed in
its skills, it has the highest proficiency possible for its level
(trained at 1st, expert at 3rd, master at 7th, and legendary
at 15th); otherwise, it’s untrained. Of course, an individual
monster might deviate from these guidelines, especially if
it’s mindless or not very perceptive.
Core Rulebook
520
Disabling a Hazard
The most versatile method for deactivating traps is the
Disable a Device action of the Thievery skill, though
most mechanical traps can also simply be smashed, and
magical traps can usually be counteracted. Environmental
hazards often can be overcome with Nature or Survival,
and haunts can often be overcome with Occultism or
Religion. The specific skill and DC required to disable
a hazard are listed in the hazard’s stat block. As with
detecting a hazard, disabling a hazard might require
a character to have a certain proficiency rank in the
listed skill.
A character must first detect a hazard (or have it pointed
out to them) to try to deactivate it. They can attempt to
deactivate a hazard whether or not it has already been
triggered, though some hazards no longer pose a danger
once their reactions have occurred, especially if there is
no way for them to be reset.
For most hazards, a successful check for the listed
skill against the DC in the stat block disables the hazard
without triggering it. Any other means of deactivating
the hazard are included in the hazard’s stat block, as are
any additional steps required to properly deactivate it.
A critical failure on any roll to disable a hazard triggers
it, including a critical failure on a roll to counteract a
magic hazard.
Some hazards require multiple successful checks to
deactivate, typically because they have a particularly
complicated component or have several discrete portions.
For hazards with a complex component, a critical success
on a check to disable the hazard counts as two successes
on a single component.
Damaging a Hazard
Rather than trying to carefully disable a hazard, a
character might just smash it. Damaging a mechanical
trap or another physical hazard works like damaging
objects: the hazard reduces the damage it takes by its
Hardness. In most cases, hitting the hazard also triggers
it, as explained in Attacking a Hazard below. If a
hazard’s Hit Points are reduced to its Broken Threshold
(BT) or lower, the hazard becomes broken and can’t
be activated, though it can still be repaired. If it’s
reduced to 0 HP, it’s destroyed and can’t be repaired.
(See page 272 in Chapter 6 for more information on
damaging objects.)
Hazards’ AC, applicable saving throw modifiers,
Hardness, HP, and BT are listed in their stat blocks. A
hazard that doesn’t list one of these statistics can’t be
affected by anything targeting that statistic. For example,
a hazard that has HP but no BT can’t be broken, but can
still be destroyed. Hazards are immune to anything an
object is immune to unless specifically noted otherwise,
and they can’t be targeted by anything that can’t target
objects. Some hazards may have additional immunities,
as well as resistances or weaknesses.
Attacking a Hazard
If someone hits a hazard—especially if it’s a mechanical
trap—they usually trigger it, though you might
determine otherwise in some cases. An attack that breaks
the hazard might prevent it from triggering, depending
on the circumstances. If the hazard has multiple parts,
breaking one part might still trigger the trap. For
example, if a trap has a trip wire in one location and
launches an attack from another location, severing the
trip wire could still trigger the attack. Destroying a
trap in one blow almost never triggers it. These rules
also apply to most damaging spells or other effects in
addition to attacks.
Repairing a Hazard
You might allow a character to repair a damaged hazard
to restore its functionality. You determine the specifics of
this, since it can vary by trap. The Repair action might be
insufficient if fixing the trap requires gathering scattered
components or the like. If the item has a Reset entry, the
character needs to do whatever is listed there, in addition
to repairing the damage.
Counteracting a Magical Hazard
Some magical hazards can be counteracted using dispel
magic and the counteracting rules found on page 458.
These hazards’ spell levels and counteract DCs are listed
in their stat block. Counteracting a hazard otherwise
works like using a skill check to disable the hazard.
Hazard Experience
Characters gain Experience Points for overcoming a
hazard, whether they disable it, avoid it, or simply endure
its attacks. If they trigger the same hazard later on, they
don’t gain XP for the hazard again. The XP values for
hazards of different levels also appear on page 508, but
are repeated here for convenience. The XP for a complex
hazard is equal to the XP for a monster of the same level,
and the XP for a simple hazard is one-fifth of that. Hazards
of a lower level than the party’s level – 4 are trivial and
award no XP.
TABLE 10–14: HAZARD XP
 XP Award
Level Simple Hazard Complex Hazard
Party level – 4 2 XP 10 XP
Party level – 3 3 XP 15 XP
Party level – 2 4 XP 20 XP
Party level – 1 6 XP 30 XP
Party level 8 XP 40 XP
Party level + 1 12 XP 60 XP
Party level + 2 16 XP 80 XP
Party level + 3 24 XP 120 XP
Party level + 4 30 XP 150 XP
GAME MASTERING
521
10
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Hazard Format
Hazards are presented in a stat block format similar to
those used for monsters. A few notes regarding the format
follow the sample stat block.
HAZARD NAME HAZARD [LEVEL]
TRAITS
Stealth This entry lists the Stealth modifier for a complex
hazard’s initiative or the Stealth DC to detect a simple
hazard, followed by the minimum proficiency rank to detect
the hazard (if any) in parentheses. If detect magic can be
used to detect the hazard, this information is located here
as well.
Description This explains what the hazard looks like and might
include special rules.
Disable The DC of any skill checks required to disable the
hazard are here; if the hazard can be counteracted, its spell
level and counteract DC are listed in parentheses.
AC the hazard’s AC; Saving Throws the hazard’s saves. Usually
only haunts are subject to Will saves.
Hardness the hazard’s Hardness; HP the hazard’s Hit Points,
with its Broken Threshold in parentheses; Immunities the
hazard’s immunities; Weaknesses the hazard’s weaknesses,
if any; Resistances the hazard’s resistances, if any
Action Type [reaction] or [free-action] This is the reaction or free action the
hazard uses; Trigger The trigger that sets off the hazard
appears here. Effect For a simple hazard, this effect is often
all the hazard does. For a complex hazard, this might also
cause the hazard to roll initiative.
Routine This section describes what a complex hazard does on
each of its turns during an encounter; the number in parentheses
after the word “Routine” indicates how many actions the hazard
can use each turn. Simple hazards don’t have this entry.
Action Any action the hazard can use appears here. Typically,
this is a melee or ranged attack.
Reset If the hazard can be reset, that information is here.
Level
The hazard’s level indicates what level of party it’s a good
challenge for. If the hazard involves a toxin, curse, or other
non-spell feature, that feature’s level is the hazard’s level.
Traits
The most notable hazard traits are trap (constructed to
harm intruders), environmental (natural hazards), and
haunt (spectral phenomena). Traps have a trait to indicate
whether they’re magical or mechanical. Hazards that have
initiative and a routine have the complex trait.
Stealth or Stealth DC
Complex hazards list their Stealth modifier, which they
use for initiative, instead of their Stealth DC. If you need
the DC, it’s equal to this modifier + 10.
Simple Hazards
A simple hazard uses its reaction only once, after which
its threat is over unless the hazard is reset.
HIDDEN PIT HAZARD 0
MECHANICAL TRAP
Stealth DC 18 (or 0 if the trapdoor is disabled or broken)
Description A wooden trapdoor covers a pit that’s 10 feet
square and 20 feet deep.
Disable Thievery DC 12 to remove the trapdoor
AC 10; Fort +1, Ref +1
Trapdoor Hardness 3, Trapdoor HP 12 (BT 6); Immunities
critical hits, object immunities, precision damage
Pitfall [reaction] Trigger A creature walks onto the trapdoor. Effect
The triggering creature falls in and takes falling damage
(typically 10 bludgeoning damage). That creature can use
the Grab an Edge reaction to avoid falling.
Reset Creatures can still fall into the trap, but the trapdoor
must be reset manually for the trap to become hidden again.
HAZARDS BY NAME
This chapter’s hazards are organized by level and
complexity. If you need to look up a hazard by its name,
use the following table.
Hazard Name Level Complexity Page
Armageddon orb 23 Simple 526
Banshee’s symphony 18 Complex 529
Bloodthirsty urge 10 Simple 524
Bottomless pit 9 Simple 524
Darkside mirror 14 Complex 528
Drowning pit 3 Complex 526
Electric latch rune 3 Simple 523
Fireball rune 5 Simple 524
Frozen moment 17 Simple 525
Hallucination powder trap 6 Simple 524
Hammer of forbiddance 11 Simple 525
Hidden pit 0 Simple 522
Lava flume tube 10 Complex 528
Pharaoh’s ward 7 Simple 524
Planar rift 13 Simple 525
Poisoned dart gallery 8 Complex 528
Poisoned lock 1 Simple 522
Polymorph trap 12 Simple 525
Quicksand 3 Complex 526
Scythe blades 4 Simple 523
Second chance 21 Simple 525
Slamming door 1 Simple 523
Spear launcher 2 Simple 523
Spinning blade pillar 4 Complex 527
Summoning rune 1 Complex 526
Telekinetic swarm trap 12 Complex 528
Vorpal executioner 19 Simple 525
Wheel of misery 6 Complex 527
Yellow mold 8 Simple 524
Core Rulebook
522
POISONED LOCK HAZARD 1
MECHANICAL TRAP
Stealth DC 17 (trained)
Description A spring-loaded, poisoned spine is hidden near
the keyhole of a lock. Disabling or breaking the trap does not
disable or break the lock.
Disable Thievery DC 17 (trained) on the spring mechanism
AC 15; Fort +8, Ref +4
Hardness 6, HP 24 (BT 12); Immunities critical hits, object
immunities, precision damage
Spring [reaction] (attack); Trigger A creature tries to unlock or Pick the
Lock. Effect A spine extends to attack the triggering creature.
Melee spine +13, Damage 1 piercing plus cladis poison
Cladis Poison (poison); Saving Throw DC 19 Fortitude; Maximum
Duration 4 hours; Stage 1 1d6 poison damage and drained 1
(1 hour); Stage 2 2d6 poison damage and drained 2 (1 hour);
Stage 3 3d6 poison damage and drained 2 (1 hour)
SLAMMING DOOR HAZARD 1
MECHANICAL TRAP
Stealth DC 17 (trained)
Description Pressure-sensitive panels in the floor connect to
a stone slab hidden in a hallway’s ceiling.
Disable Thievery DC 15 (trained) on the floor panels before
the slab falls
AC 16; Fort +10, Ref +2
Hardness 5, HP 20 (BT 10); Immunities critical hits, object
immunities, precision damage
Slam Shut [reaction] Trigger Pressure is placed on any floor tile. Effect
The door falls, closing off the hallway. The stone slab deals
3d8 bludgeoning damage to anyone beneath or adjacent to
the slab when it drops and pushes them out of its space in a
random direction. A creature that succeeds at a DC 17 Reflex
save takes no damage and rolls out of the way in a random
direction. On a critical success, they can choose the direction.
Lifting the fallen slab requires a successful DC 25
Athletics check. Hitting the floor panels triggers the
trap. The slab uses the same AC and saves as the
trap, but it has Hardness 12, HP 48 (BT 24).
SPEAR LAUNCHER HAZARD 2
MECHANICAL TRAP
Stealth DC 20 (trained)
Description A wall socket loaded with a spear
connects to a floor tile in one 5-foot square.
Disable Thievery DC 18 (trained) on the floor
tile or wall socket
AC 18; Fort +11, Ref +3
Hardness 8, HP 32 (BT 16); Immunities critical
hits, object immunities, precision damage
Spear [reaction] (attack); Trigger Pressure is
applied to the floor tile. Effect The
trap shoots a spear, making an attack
against the creature or object on the
floor tile.
Ranged spear +14, Damage 2d6+6 piercing
ELECTRIC LATCH RUNE HAZARD 3
ELECTRICITY EVOCATION MAGICAL TRAP
Stealth DC 20 (trained)
Description An invisible rune imprinted on a door latch
releases a powerful electric discharge.
Disable Thievery DC 20 (expert) to scratch out the rune
without allowing electricity to flow, or dispel magic (2nd
level; counteract DC 18) to counteract the rune
Electrocution [reaction] (arcane, electricity, evocation); Trigger A
creature grasps the door latch directly or with a tool. Effect
The trap deals 3d12 electricity damage to the triggering
creature (DC 22 basic Reflex save).
SCYTHE BLADES HAZARD 4
MECHANICAL TRAP
Stealth DC 23 (trained)
Description Two blades, each hidden in a 15-foot-long ceiling
groove, are both connected to a trip wire.
Disable Thievery DC 21 (trained) to disable each blade
AC 21; Fort +12, Ref +8
Hardness 11, HP 44 (BT 22); Immunities critical hits, object
immunities, precision damage
Falling Scythes [reaction] (attack); Trigger The trip wire is pulled or
severed. Effect Both blades swing down, each one attacking
all creatures under the ceiling grooves.
Melee scythe +17 (deadly 1d12), Damage 2d12+4 slashing; no
multiple attack penalty
Reset The trap resets after 15 minutes.
GAME MASTERING
523
10
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
FIREBALL RUNE HAZARD 5
EVOCATION FIRE MAGICAL TRAP
Stealth DC 24 (expert)
Description An invisible rune creates an invisible, spherical
magical sensor with a 20-foot radius.
Disable Thievery DC 22 (expert) to erase the rune without
triggering the sensor, or dispel magic (3rd level; counteract
DC 20) to counteract the rune
Fireball [reaction] (arcane, evocation, fire); Trigger A living creature
enters the sensor area. Effect The rune detonates a fireball
centered on the triggering creature’s square. This is a 3rdlevel fireball spell that deals 6d6 fire damage (DC 22 basic
Reflex save).
HALLUCINATION POWDER TRAP HAZARD 6
MECHANICAL TRAP
Stealth DC 24 (expert)
Description A tube of hallucinogenic powder armed with a
miniature explosive is connected to a doorknob or similar latch.
Disable Thievery DC 26 (expert) to disable the hammer that
strikes the percussion cap
AC 24; Fort +0, Ref +0
Hardness 0, HP 1; Immunities critical hits, object immunities,
precision damage
Powder Burst [reaction] (mental, poison); Trigger The latch is opened
or the tube is broken. Effect The tube explodes, spraying
hallucinogenic powder in a 30-foot cone. Any creature in
the cone must succeed at a DC 24 Will save or be confused
for 1 round and take a –2 status penalty to Perception
checks and saves against mental effects for 1d4 hours. On a
critical failure, the penalty is instead –4.
PHARAOH’S WARD HAZARD 7
MAGICAL TRAP
Stealth DC 25 (expert)
Description A curse is imbued on an entryway’s threshold.
Disable Thievery DC 27 (master) to painstakingly remove the
lintel without triggering the magic, or dispel magic (4th
level; counteract DC 25) to counteract the rune
Curse the Intruders [reaction] (curse, divine, necromancy); Trigger The
seal on the tomb is broken from the outside. Effect Each living
creature within 60 feet must succeed at a DC 23 Will save or
be subjected to the pharaoh’s curse. A cursed creature takes
a –2 status penalty to Fortitude saves, and any natural or
magical healing it receives is halved. The curse remains until
removed by remove curse or similar magic.
Reset The trap resets when the door is shut.
YELLOW MOLD HAZARD 8
ENVIRONMENTAL FUNGUS
Stealth DC 28 (trained)
Description Poisonous mold spores assault nearby creatures.
Disable Survival DC 26 (expert) to remove the mold without
triggering the spores
AC 27; Fort +17, Ref +13
HP 70; Immunities critical hits, object immunities, precision damage
Spore Explosion [reaction] Trigger A creature moves into the mold’s
space or damages the mold. The mold can’t use this reaction
if it’s in direct sunlight or if the damage was fire damage.
Effect The triggering creature and all creatures within 10
feet are exposed to yellow mold spores.
Yellow Mold Spores (inhaled, poison) Any drained condition
from the spores persists after the poison’s duration ends;
Saving Throw DC 26 Fortitude; Maximum Duration 6
rounds; Stage 1 1d8 poison damage and drained 1 (1 round);
Stage 2 2d8 poison damage and drained 2 (1 round); Stage
3 3d8 poison damage and drained 3 (1 round)
BOTTOMLESS PIT HAZARD 9
MAGICAL MECHANICAL TRAP
Stealth DC 30 (or 0 if the trapdoor is disabled or broken) or
detect magic
Description An iron trapdoor covers an infinitely deep
10-foot-square pit.
Disable Thievery DC 28 (trained) to remove the trapdoor
AC 28; Fort +12, Ref +12
Trapdoor Hardness 9, Trapdoor HP 36 (BT 18); Immunities
critical hits, object immunities, precision damage
Infinite Pitfall [reaction] Trigger A creature walks onto the trapdoor.
Effect The triggering creature falls in and continues to fall,
potentially forever. That creature can try to Grab an Edge to
avoid falling (page 472). The DC to Climb the walls or Grab
an Edge is 26.
The pit contains many handholds, so the falling creature
can try to Grab an Edge again every 6 seconds. If the
creature succeeds, it can start to Climb out from that point
(though it might be a very long climb, depending on how
far the creature fell). Since the creature falls endlessly, it
can rest and even prepare spells while falling, though items
dropped while falling are usually lost forever.
Reset The trap still causes creatures to fall forever if they fall
in, but the trapdoor must be reset manually for the trap to
become hidden again.
BLOODTHIRSTY URGE HAZARD 10
HAUNT
Stealth DC 31 (trained)
Description An object haunted by the echoes of a vicious mind
attempts to kill someone who comes near.
Disable Religion DC 29 (master) to exorcise the spirit or
Diplomacy DC 31 (expert) to talk it down
Quietus [reaction] (death, emotion, fear, illusion, mental, occult);
Trigger A creature moves within 10 feet of the haunted
object. Effect The haunt takes control of the triggering
creature, forcing it to attack itself. The creature must
attempt a DC 29 Will save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target makes a Strike against itself and automatically
hits; the target also becomes frightened 1.
Failure The target makes a Strike against itself and automatically
scores a critical hit; the target also becomes frightened 2.
Critical Failure The target attempts a Fortitude save. If the
Core Rulebook
524
target succeeds, it is subject to the effects of a failure instead.
If the target fails, it is reduced to 0 Hit Points and dies.
HAMMER OF FORBIDDANCE HAZARD 11
MAGICAL MECHANICAL TRAP
Stealth DC 30 (expert)
Description An enormous hammer at an edifice’s entrance
swings down in an attempt to damage a creature entering
an area, push it back, and prevent it from going any further.
Disable Thievery DC 28 (expert) once on the hammer itself
and once on its joint to prevent the hammer from swinging
AC 32; Fort +24, Ref +15
Hammer Hardness 22, Hammer HP 88 (BT 44); Joint Hardness
16, Joint HP 64 (BT 32); Immunities critical hits, object
immunities, precision damage
Forbid Entry [reaction] (abjuration, attack, divine); Trigger A creature
attempts to enter through the entrance. Effect The hammer
swings down, making an attack against the triggering creature.
Melee hammer +28, Damage 6d8+20 bludgeoning plus the
target is knocked back 10 feet and must succeed at a DC
30 Will save or be unable to enter the edifice through
any entrance for 24 hours (on a critical hit, the target
automatically fails the Will save); no multiple attack penalty
Reset The trap resets over the course of the round, and is
ready to swing again 1 round later.
POLYMORPH TRAP HAZARD 12
MAGICAL TRAP
Stealth DC 34 (trained)
Description A Druidic glyph tries to transforms a trespasser
into an animal.
Disable Thievery DC 32 (master) to drain the glyph’s power
harmlessly, or dispel magic (6th level; counteract DC 30) to
counteract the glyph
Baleful Polymorph [reaction] (primal, transmutation); Trigger
A creature moves within 30 feet of the glyph without
speaking the passphrase in Druidic. Effect The creature is
targeted by baleful polymorph (DC 32 Will save).
PLANAR RIFT HAZARD 13
MAGICAL TRAP
Stealth DC 35 (trained)
Description A rift attempts to draw creatures into another
plane (the GM chooses the specific plane).
Disable Thievery DC 33 (master) to assemble a rift seal using
objects strongly grounded to your plane, or dispel magic
(7th level; counteract DC 31) to counteract the rift
Into the Great Beyond [reaction] (conjuration, occult, teleportation);
Trigger A creature moves within 10 feet of the rift. Effect The
triggering creature and all creatures within 30 feet of the
rift are drawn into another plane. Each creature can attempt
a DC 33 Reflex save to avoid this fate.
FROZEN MOMENT HAZARD 17
MAGICAL TRAP
Stealth DC 40 (master)
Description Warding magic attempts to trap intruders or
would-be thieves in a disrupted time flow.
Disable Thievery DC 38 (legendary) to rapidly disassemble
the spell’s myriad components in a single blink of an eye;
or dispel magic (9th level; counteract DC 36) to counteract
the trap before it triggers or to counteract the effect on one
creature after the trap is triggered
Adrift in Time [reaction] (occult, transmutation); Trigger A creature
touches the warded object or area. Effect The triggering
creature and all creatures within 30 feet are trapped
in a disrupted time flow (DC 38 Fortitude negates). The
creatures’ minds move so quickly that each round seems to
last a century, but their bodies and magical energies move
so slowly that they can’t use any actions except Recall
Knowledge. An affected creature must attempt a DC 36 Will
saving throw against a warp mind spell immediately and
again for every minute of real time that passes while the
creature is trapped in the frozen moment. This effect has an
unlimited duration but can be counteracted.
VORPAL EXECUTIONER HAZARD 19
MECHANICAL TRAP
Stealth DC 43 (expert)
Description A wickedly sharp saw blade descends and
travels along grooves in a complex path throughout the room,
attempting to decapitate everyone within.
Disable Thievery DC 41 (expert) at four different junctions to
jam all the saw blade’s possible paths, preventing it from
traveling through the room
AC 43; Fort +32, Ref +32
Hardness 30; HP 120 (BT 60) per junction; Immunities critical
hits, object immunities, precision damage
Total Decapitation [reaction] (attack, death); Trigger A creature
attempts to exit the room. Effect The saw blade travels
along its path, making one Strike against each creature in
the room, twisting and varying its height for a maximum
chance of beheading its targets.
Melee saw blade +40 (deadly d12), Damage 6d12+25 slashing
plus decapitation; no multiple attack penalty
Decapitation On a critical hit, a target must succeed at a DC
39 Fortitude save or be decapitated, dying instantly unless
it can survive without a head.
Reset The trap resets over the course of the round and can be
triggered again 1 round later.
SECOND CHANCE HAZARD 21
MAGICAL TRAP
Stealth DC 44 (legendary)
Description Powerful warding magic tied to an object or
location tries to regress the ages of a creature and its allies.
Disable Thievery DC 46 (legendary) to take apart the spell one
tiny piece at a time, with eyes closed, while recalling every
vivid life memory in order, starting from the earliest memory
In the Beginning [reaction] (divine, transmutation); Trigger A creature
tries to steal the object or intrude upon the location. If
someone uses a proxy or dupe for the theft or intrusion, the
GAME MASTERING
525
10
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
trap unerringly targets the true perpetrator or perpetrators
at any distance—even across planes. Effect The triggering
creature and up to five coconspirators instantly revert to
infants, losing all memories, class abilities, and other skills
acquired during their lives (DC 44 Fortitude negates).
Reversing this effect is nearly impossible, requiring
powerful magic such as wish.
ARMAGEDDON ORB HAZARD 23
RARE MAGICAL TRAP
Stealth DC 10 or detect magic
Description A roiling red orb, forged from a drop of the god
Rovagug’s blood, rains fire from the sky when a specified
condition is met.
Disable Thievery DC 48 (legendary) to imbue thieves’ tools
with aspects representing Asmodeus and Sarenrae and use
them to drain away the orb’s power over 10 minutes; the
character attempting this check takes 5 fire damage each
round until the orb is depleted
Burn It All [reaction] (death, divine, evocation, fire); Trigger A special
condition set by the trap’s creator occurs; this is typically
the event of their death. Effect Fire rains from the sky in a
100-mile radius, dealing 10d6 fire damage to creatures and
objects in the area. Each creature or object can attempt a DC
46 basic Reflex save. Any creature reduced to 0 Hit Points
by this damage dies instantly. This is not enough damage to
completely burn away a forest or level an entire mountain
or city, but it typically kills most creatures in the area.
Complex Hazards
Complex hazards function similarly to monsters during
encounters, as they roll initiative and have actions of their
own, though these are usually automated in a routine.
SUMMONING RUNE HAZARD 1
COMPLEX MAGICAL TRAP
Stealth +7 (trained)
Description A cloud of invisible magical sensors in a 10-foot
radius surrounds an invisible wall or floor rune the size of the
creature to be summoned.
Disable Acrobatics DC 15 to approach without triggering the
trap followed by Thievery DC 17 (trained) to erase the rune, or
dispel magic (1st level; counteract DC 15) to counteract the rune
Summon Monster [reaction] (arcane, conjuration, summon; Trigger
A creature enters the cloud of magical sensors. Effect
This trap summons a specific level 1 creature, determined
when the trap is created. The creature rolls initiative and
remains for 2d6 rounds, after which the spell ends and
the creature disappears. The creature also disappears if
someone disables the trap before the duration expires. The
summoned creature can use 3 actions each round and can
use reactions, unlike most summoned creatures.
Reset The trap resets each day at dawn.
DROWNING PIT HAZARD 3
COMPLEX MECHANICAL TRAP
Stealth +10 (trained); DC 22 (expert) to notice the water
spouts once the pit opens
Description A trapdoor covers a 10-foot-square pit that’s 30
feet deep and has 5 feet of water at the bottom. Four water
spouts in the walls connect to hidden water tanks. Each water
spout extends out of a different wall, 6 inches from the top
of the pit.
Disable Thievery DC 18 (trained) to seal each water spout,
Thievery DC 22 (trained) to open the trapdoor, or Athletics
DC 22 to Force Open the trapdoor
AC 19; Fort +8, Ref +5
Trapdoor Hardness 15, Trapdoor HP 60 (BT 30); Spout
Hardness 8, Spout HP 32 (BT 16); Immunities critical hits,
object immunities, precision damage
Pitfall [reaction] Trigger A creature walks onto the trapdoor. Effect
The triggering creature falls in and takes damage from the
fall, reduced by 5 feet for falling into the water (typically 12
bludgeoning damage). A creature can Grab an Edge to avoid
falling (page 472). The trapdoor then slams shut, and the
hazard rolls initiative.
Routine (4 actions) The trap loses 1 action each turn for each
disabled water spout. On each of the trap’s actions, a spout
pours water, increasing the depth of the water by 5 feet.
Once the pit is full of water, the pit stops using actions, but
creatures in the pit begin drowning (page 478).
Reset The trap can be reset if the door is manually reengaged
and the water tanks refilled; it can be reset without draining
the pit, but doing so renders it less effective.
QUICKSAND HAZARD 3
COMPLEX ENVIRONMENTAL
Stealth +12 (trained) (or –10 and no minimum proficiency if the
surface is disturbed)
Description A 15-foot-wide patch of water and sand attempts
to submerge creatures that step onto it.
Disable Survival DC 18 (trained) to disturb the surface
Submerge [free-action] Trigger A Huge or smaller creature walks onto
the quicksand. Effect The triggering creature sinks into the
quicksand up to its waist. The quicksand rolls initiative if it
hasn’t already.
Routine (1 action) On its initiative, the quicksand pulls down
each creature within it. A creature that was submerged up to
its waist becomes submerged up to its neck, and a creature
UPGRADED SUMMONING RUNES
You can make a summoning rune of nearly any level. It
summons a creature of a level equal to the trap’s level.
Use Table 10–5: DCs by Level on page 503 to determine
the Thievery DC and spell DC, using the trap’s level and
applying a hard adjustment (+2). The Stealth modifier for
the trap is equal to this number – 10. Stronger summoning
runes usually require expert proficiency or better in
Perception to find, and they might require a higher
proficiency rank in Thievery to disable.
Core Rulebook
526
that was submerged up to its neck is pulled under and has to
hold its breath to avoid suffocation (page 478).
A creature in the quicksand can attempt a DC 20 Athletics
check to Swim to either raise itself by one step if it’s submerged
to its neck or worse, or to move 5 feet if it’s submerged only
up to its waist. On a critical failure, the creature is pulled down
one step. A creature that Swims out of the quicksand escapes
the hazard and is prone in a space adjacent to the quicksand
patch. Other creatures can Aid the creature, typically by using
a rope or similar aid, or attempt to pull the creature out with
their own DC 20 Athletics check, with the same results as if
the creature attempted the check.
Reset The hazard still submerges anyone who walks in, but
the surface doesn’t become hidden again until it settles over
the course of 24 hours.
SPINNING BLADE PILLAR HAZARD 4
COMPLEX MECHANICAL TRAP
Stealth +11 (trained) or DC 26 (expert) to notice the control panel
Description A metal pole with three razor-sharp spinning
blades is hidden in the floor, connected to trigger plates in up
to eight floor tiles and a hidden control panel within 30 feet.
Disable Thievery DC 21 (trained) twice on the pillar, or Thievery
DC 19 (expert) once on the control panel deactivates the
whole trap. Breaking the control panel prevents anyone
from disabling the trap using the control panel and prevents
the trap from deactivating automatically (see Reset below).
AC 21; Fort +10, Ref +12
Pillar Hardness 12, Pillar HP 48 (BT 24); Panel Hardness
5, Panel HP 20 (BT 10); Immunities critical hits, object
immunities, precision damage
Rising Pillar [reaction] (attack); Trigger A creature steps on one of
the trapped floor tiles. Effect The trap pops up in a grid
intersection and makes a spinning blade attack against
one adjacent creature (if any), then rolls initiative.
Routine (3 actions) The trap uses its first action
to make a spinning blade Strike against each
adjacent creature, its second action to move
straight in a random direction (roll 1d4 to
determine the direction), and its third action
to make a spinning blade Strike against
each adjacent creature. This trap doesn’t
take a multiple attack penalty.
Speed 10 feet
Melee [one-action] spinning blade +12, Damage
2d10+5 slashing
Reset The trap deactivates and resets
after 1 minute.
WHEEL OF MISERY HAZARD 6
COMPLEX MAGICAL MECHANICAL TRAP
Stealth +16 (expert) to detect the
magical sensor; noticing the wheel
has a DC of 0
Description An ornate wheel set into a
wall—divided into six segments with colored
runes on each—is controlled by a magical sensor that detects
any creature within 100 feet in front of it.
Disable Thievery DC 26 (expert) on the wheel to stop it from
spinning, Thievery DC 22 (master) to erase each rune, or
dispel magic (4th level; counteract DC 22) to counteract
each rune
AC 24; Fort +15, Ref +13
Hardness 14, HP 56 (BT 28); Immunities critical hits, object
immunities, precision damage
Wheel Spin [reaction] Trigger A creature enters the sensor’s detection
area. Effect The wheel begins to spin and rolls initiative.
Routine (2 actions) On its initiative, the trap uses its first action
to spin, then stops. Roll 1d6 to determine which segment is
topmost when the wheel stops spinning. The wheel uses its
second action to replicate the spell listed for that segment
(3rd level, DC 24, spell attack roll +14). This spell’s target is
centered on or otherwise includes the nearest creature in the
area. This increases the spell’s range to 100 feet if necessary.
Any spell cast by this trap is arcane.
1 sleep
2 paralyze
3 lightning bolt (100-foot line)
4 blindness
5 acid arrow
6 ray of enfeeblement
Reset The trap deactivates and resets if 1 minute passes
without any creature moving within range of its sensor.
GAME MASTERING
527
10
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
POISONED DART GALLERY HAZARD 8
COMPLEX MECHANICAL TRAP
Stealth +16 (expert) or DC 31 (master) to notice the control panel
Description Countless holes to launch poison darts from line a
long hallway with a hidden control panel on the far end.
Disable Thievery DC 21 (expert) on the control panel
deactivates the trap.
AC 27; Fort +13, Ref +17
Hardness 14; HP 56 (BT 28) to destroy the control panel and
disable the trap; Immunities critical hits, object immunities,
precision damage
Dart Volley [reaction] (attack); Trigger A creature enters the hallway
or ends its turn in the hallway. Effect The trap makes a
poisoned dart Strike against the triggering creature, then
rolls initiative.
Routine (1 action) The trap launches one dart against every
creature in the gallery as 1 action. Because it launches darts
continuously, the trap can also use the Continuous Barrage
free action (see below) to launch darts at each creature during
that creature’s turn.
Ranged poisoned dart +21, Damage 3d4 piercing plus flesset
poison; no multiple attack penalty
Continuous Barrage [free-action] Trigger A creature within the active
gallery finishes an action. Effect The trap makes a poisoned
dart Strike against the triggering creature.
Flesset Poison (poison); Saving Throw DC 22 Fortitude;
Maximum Duration 6 rounds; Stage 1 1d6 poison damage and
clumsy 1 (1 round); Stage 2 2d6 poison damage and clumsy 2
(1 round); Stage 3 3d6 poison damage and clumsy 3 (1 round)
Reset The trap deactivates and resets after 1 minute.
LAVA FLUME TUBE HAZARD 10
COMPLEX MECHANICAL TRAP
Stealth +19 (trained)
Description Four gated channels carved into stone allow lava
to flow into a 15-foot-tall room; the floor can withdraw to allow
the hardened lava to fall into a chamber beneath.
Disable Thievery DC 29 (expert) to block a channel, or Thievery
DC 31 (master) to release the floor latch and escape to the
chamber below
AC 30; Fort +20, Ref +16
Channel Hardness 12, Channel HP 48 (BT 24) to destroy a
channel gate (this prevents that channel from being disabled
and stops the trap from resetting); Floor Hardness 18; Floor
HP 72 (BT 36); Immunities critical hits, object immunities,
precision damage
Flume Activation [reaction] Trigger A creature tries to leave the room.
Effect The exits seal instantly and the trap rolls initiative.
Routine (4 actions) The trap loses 1 action per disabled
channel each turn. On each action, a different channel spews
lava, dealing 4d6 fire damage to each creature within 10 feet
of the channel (DC 27 basic Reflex save), and increasing the
depth of the lava in the room by 1 foot (4 feet per round if all
the channels are active).
A creature that starts its turn in lava takes 8d6 fire damage
and is immobilized until it Escapes the hardening lava (DC 27).
The creature might suffocate if covered in lava (page 478). Lava
from the previous round hardens fully at the start of the trap’s
turn, effectively raising the floor of the room. Once the room is
full of lava, the trap stops taking actions, but creatures in the
room remain stuck until the floor opens and the trap resets.
Reset The trap deactivates and resets after 1 hour by withdrawing
the floor, cracking and dumping the hardened lava (and any
creatures trapped inside) into the chamber. Creatures fall 40
feet, taking falling damage (typically 17 bludgeoning damage).
TELEKINETIC SWARM TRAP HAZARD 12
COMPLEX MAGICAL MECHANICAL TRAP
Stealth +24 (expert)
Description Three innocuous decorations instilled with
telekinetic magic pull objects and pieces of the room itself into
spinning clouds of debris that attack all creatures in the room.
Disable Thievery DC 27 (expert) to take apart a telekinetic
cloud, Thievery DC 32 (master) to disable each telekinetic
decoration, or dispel magic (6th level; counteract DC 30) to
counteract each telekinetic decoration
AC 33; Fort +24, Ref +19
Hardness 22, HP 88 (BT 44) per telekinetic cloud
Agitate [reaction] (arcane, evocation); Trigger A creature stays in the
room for at least 6 seconds. Effect Each telekinetic decoration
constructs a cloud of objects in the room (three clouds total)
and the trap rolls initiative. The creatures in the room when
the trap is triggered become the trap’s targets, regardless of
whether they leave the room or other creatures later enter
the room. Each decoration targets a different creature if
possible. A target creature that moves at least 1 mile from
the trap ceases being a target, at which point the decoration
designates a new target.
Routine (9 actions) Each decoration uses 3 of the trap’s
actions each turn, and the trap loses 3 actions each turn for
every decoration that is disabled. A decoration uses its first
action to move its cloud of objects up to 200 feet, its second
action to make the objects Strike, and its third action to add
more objects to the cloud, increasing its damage by 1d12 (to
a maximum of 4d12+10). If a decoration’s cloud is already at
maximum damage, it does nothing with its third action.
If a decoration’s cloud has been destroyed, the decoration
instead spends its first action to create a new cloud of objects
inside the room (using the starting damage value) and then its
second and third actions to have the cloud move and attack.
Melee [one-action] objects +24, Damage 2d12+10 bludgeoning
Reset The trap deactivates and resets 10 minutes after it has
no target creatures (because the creatures either moved too
far away or died).
DARKSIDE MIRROR HAZARD 14
COMPLEX MAGICAL MECHANICAL TRAP
Stealth +24 (master) to notice it isn’t a regular mirror
Description A magic mirror replaces characters with evil
mirror duplicates from another dimension.
Disable Thievery DC 34 (legendary) to retrieve a creature
from the other dimension within 10 minutes of the switch
Core Rulebook
528
(possible only if their mirror duplicate is dead), Thievery
DC 39 (master) to permanently disable the mirror once
all mirror duplicates are dead, or dispel magic (7th level;
counteract DC 32) to counteract the mirror for 1 minute and
prevent additional replacements during that time
AC 34; Fort +25, Ref +20
Hardness 1, HP 4 (BT 2), the mirror can’t be damaged while
any mirror duplicate is alive
Reflection of Evil [reaction] (arcane, conjuration, teleportation);
Trigger A non-evil creature is reflected in the mirror. Effect
The mirror absorbs the creature into the mirror, replacing it
with an evil mirror duplicate (DC 34 Reflex to avoid being
absorbed into the mirror), and rolls initiative.
Routine (1 action) The mirror absorbs another reflected
creature into the mirror and replaces it with a mirror
duplicate. Mirror duplicates attack on their own initiative,
using the same statistics as the original creature, but with
an evil alignment (changing only abilities that shift with the
alignment change). A mirror duplicate can spend 3 actions in
contact with the mirror to return to its original dimension and
release the creature it duplicated, but most mirror duplicates
prefer not to.
Reset The mirror is always ready to absorb creatures into the
other dimension. Ten minutes after a creature is sucked into
the mirror, if an ally doesn’t rescue the creature with Thievery,
it reaches the other dimension, where it might be captured or
killed. In the mirror dimension, it counts as a mirror duplicate,
so the denizens of the other dimension can’t destroy the
mirror on their side while the absorbed creature is there.
These dimensions are alternate realities, not planes, so even
rituals like plane shift can’t reach them.
BANSHEE’S SYMPHONY HAZARD 18
COMPLEX MAGICAL TRAP
Stealth +30 (legendary)
Description A magically contagious wail of the banshee spell
is trapped in the larynx of an invisible, mummified elf.
Disable Thievery DC 42 (master) to pierce the invisible larynx
so precisely that the magic releases in a trickle before the
trap activates, Thievery DC 44 (legendary) three times to
deconstruct the larynx while the trap is active in such a
way that it tears the spell apart, or spell DC 38 (9th level) to
counteract the wail of the banshee before the trap activates
Scream [reaction] Trigger Three or more living creatures remain
within 100 feet of the trap for 6 seconds or longer. Effect
The trap releases an arcane wail of the banshee (DC 40) with
a 100-foot-radius emanation instead of 40 feet, targeting all
living creatures in the area, and rolls initiative.
Routine (1 action) The trap uses its action to force one random
creature that failed its save against wail of the banshee last
turn to emit a wail of the banshee with the same statistics as
the initial one. The creature wails even if it is dead or unable
to speak, no matter how far away from the trap it is. Unlike a
casting of the spell, the drained condition from this trap’s wail
of the banshee spells increases the targets’ drained condition
values. A creature that critically succeeds at any of its saves
can still be affected by the trap on future rounds, but can’t be
forced to wail by the trap.
Reset The trap ends when the trap is unable to make a
creature scream (usually because no creature failed its save
on the previous turn or because all creatures have critically
succeeded in the past). It then resets over 24 hours, as a new
scream builds up in the mummified larynx.
GAME MASTERING
529
10
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Core Rulebook
530
Treasure comes in all sorts of forms, from humble copper
coins to incredibly powerful and valuable magic items.
The GM controls the flow of items in the game as the PCs
win them through adventures, find them for purchase, or
acquire the formulas to make the items themselves.
Items can support characters by granting bonuses to their
statistics, allowing them to cast more spells, and creating
all sorts of effects that can’t be achieved in any other way.
Magic items come in many varieties, from enchanted swords
that can harm even incorporeal undead to containers that
can store a king’s ransom within a tiny space; many are
permanent items that can be used repeatedly. Alchemical
items, by contrast, are not intrinsically magical and are
often consumed when used. Both have a variety of uses,
from curing the sick to lighting foes on fire. Some treasures
are neither magical nor alchemical, but are instead crafted
from precious materials or using specialized expertise.
This chapter provides rules for using different kinds
of items encountered in the game. Rules for distributing
treasure and creating treasure hoards can be found on
page 508 of Chapter 10: Game Mastering.
• Using Items, beginning below, describes how to
activate items and explains the statistics for items.
• Table 11–1: Treasure by Level, beginning on page
536, lists the options for treasures, arranged by
level, category, and Price.
• The catalog of items, which begins on page 543,
presents descriptions and rules for all sorts of
different treasures that can appear in the game,
sorted by category (page 533 has a list of key
categories and subcategories). This also includes
a section on precious materials found in the game
world, which can give items unusual properties.
Using Items
This section presents the rules for how characters use
alchemical items, magic items, and other special items
during play.
The myriad types of items give their powerful boons in
different ways. Some function automatically, while others
need to be activated. While you need only swing a flaming
greataxe to scorch foes, you need to invest a diadem of
intellect for it to work, imbibe an elixir of life to heal
yourself, activate slippers of spider climbing to walk up
a wall, activate your mail of luck to protect yourself, and
Cast a Spell using a magical scroll.
Chapter 11: Crafting & Treasure
Characters acquire treasure from the glittering hoards of their foes, as rewards for defending
the innocent, and as favors from the grand personalities they treat with. As they progress
through their adventures and improve their station in the world, characters collect ever
more fabulous items from enchanted armor and weapons to spell-infused staves.
Constant Abilities
Some magic items have abilities that always function.
You don’t have to use any actions to do anything special
(beyond wearing and investing a worn item or wielding
a held item) to make these abilities work. For example,
an everburning torch always sheds light, and a flaming
weapon deals fire damage every time it deals damage.
Investing Magic Items
Certain magic items convey their magical benefits only
when worn and invested using the Invest an Item activity,
tying them to your inner potential. These items have the
invested trait. Many invested items have constant abilities
that function all the time or that always trigger when you
use the item—but only when they’re invested. If you don’t
have an item invested, these abilities don’t work. If an
invested item can be activated, you must have invested
the item to activate it.
You can benefit from no more than 10 invested magic
items each day. Because this limit is fairly high, and because
it matters only for worn items, you probably won’t need
to worry about reaching the limit until higher levels, when
you’ve acquired many useful magic items to wear.
You can still gain the mundane benefits of an item if you
don’t invest it. A suit of +1 resilient armor still gives you
its item bonus to AC when not invested, but it doesn’t give
its magical bonus to saving throws, and winged boots still
protect your feet even though you can’t activate them to
fly. Entirely non-magical items don’t need to be invested.
INVEST AN ITEM
You invest your energy in an item with the invested trait as
you don it. This process requires 1 or more Interact actions,
usually taking the same amount of time it takes to don the item.
Once you’ve Invested the Item, you benefit from its constant
magical abilities as long as you meet its other requirements
(for most invested items, the only other requirement is that
you must be wearing the item). This investiture lasts until you
remove the item.
You can invest no more than 10 items per day. If you remove
an invested item, it loses its investiture. The item still counts
against your daily limit after it loses its investiture. You reset
the limit during your daily preparations, at which point you
Invest your Items anew. If you’re still wearing items you had
invested the previous day, you can typically keep them invested
on the new day, but they still count against your limit.
531
11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Activating Items
Some items produce their effects only when used properly
in the moment. Others always offer the same benefits as
their mundane counterparts when worn, but have magical
abilities you can gain by further spending actions. Either
case requires you to use the Activate an Item activity.
Activating an Item works much like Casting a Spell, in that
the activity takes a variable number of actions and can have
different components depending on how you Activate the
Item. This information appears in the item’s Activate entry.
If an item is used up when activated, as is the case for
consumable items, its Activate entry appears toward the
top of the stat block. For permanent items with activated
abilities, the Activate entry is a paragraph in the description.
Activations are not necessarily magical—for instance,
drinking an alchemical elixir isn’t usually a magical effect.
ACTIVATE AN ITEM
Requirement You can Activate an Item with the invested
trait only if it’s invested by you. If the item requires you to
Interact with it, you must be wielding it (if it’s a held item)
or touching it with a free hand (if it’s another type of item).
You call forth the effect of an item by properly activating
it. This is a special activity that takes a variable number of
actions, as listed in the item’s stat block.
Some items can be activated as a reaction or free action. In
this case, you Activate the Item as a reaction or free action (as
appropriate) instead of as an activity. Such cases are noted
in the item’s Activate entry in its stat block—for example,
“Activate [reaction] command.”
Long Activation Times Some items take minutes or hours
to activate. The Activate an Item activity for these items
includes a mix of the listed activation components, but it’s not
necessary to break down which one you’re providing at a given
time. You can’t use other actions or reactions while activating
such an item, though at the GM’s discretion, you might be able
to speak a few sentences. As with other activities that take
a long time, these activations have the exploration trait, and
you can’t activate them in an encounter. If combat breaks out
while you’re activating one, your activation is disrupted (see
the Disrupting Activations sidebar).
Activation Components Each activation entry lists any
components involved in the activation after the action icons
or text, such as “[one-action] command.” The activation components,
DISRUPTING ACTIVATIONS
Some abilities and effects can disrupt the process of
Activating an Item. If something disrupts your item
activation, you fail to Activate the Item and lose the
actions you committed. If the item can be activated only
a certain number of times per day, the failed activation
still counts against that limit. If an item requires you to
spend actions to Sustain an Activation and one of those
actions is disrupted, the item’s effect ends.
Core Rulebook
532
described below, add traits (listed in parentheses) and
requirements to the activation. If you can’t provide the
components, you fail to Activate the Item.
• Command (auditory, concentrate)
• Envision (concentrate)
• Interact (manipulate)
• Cast a Spell
Activation Components
An item’s activate entry lists the components required to
activate its abilities. Each component adds certain traits
to the Activate an Item activity, and some components
have special requirements. The components that appear
in this book are listed below.
Command
This component is a specific utterance you must make
in a loud and strong voice. Activate an Item gains the
auditory and concentrate traits. You must be able to speak
to provide this component.
Envision
This component is a specific image or phenomenon you
need to imagine. Activate an Item gains the concentrate trait.
Interact
This component works like the Interact basic action.
Activate an Item gains the manipulate trait and requires
you to use your hands, just like with any Interact action.
Cast a Spell
If an item lists “Cast a Spell” after “Activate,” the activation
requires you to use the Cast a Spell activity (described on
page 302) to Activate the Item. This happens when the
item replicates a spell. You must have a spellcasting class
feature to Activate an Item with this activation component.
If the item can be used for a specific spell, the action icon
for that spell is provided. If it’s an item like a staff, which
can be used for many spells, the icon is omitted, and you
must refer to each spell to determine which actions you
must spend to Activate the Item to cast it.
In this case, Activate an Item gains all the traits from
the relevant components of the Cast a Spell activity.
Limited Activations
Some items can be activated only a limited number of
times per day, as described in the items. This limit is
independent of any costs for activating the item. The
limit resets during your daily preparations. The limit is
inherent to the item, so if an ability that can be used only
once per day is used, it doesn’t refresh if another creature
later invests or tries to activate the item.
Sustaining Activations
Some items, once activated, have effects that can be
sustained if you concentrate on them. This works much
ITEM CATEGORIES
Items are grouped into the following categories, shown
here with the page number where those items appear
and a brief description of the category.
• Alchemical Items (page 543) are powered by the
reactions of alchemical reagents. Almost all alchemical
items are consumable items that are used up when you
activate them. This category includes bombs, elixirs
(including mutagens), poisons, and alchemical tools.
• Ammunition (page 559), in Consumables, includes
different types of magical arrows, crossbow bolts, and
other types of ammunition.
• Apex Items (page 603) are a subcategory of worn
items of a high level that increase an ability score.
• Armor (page 555) includes the rules for basic magical
armor as well as special suits of armor.
• Companion Items (page 604) are a category of worn
items meant for animal companions and mounts.
• Consumables (page 559) are used up when you
activate them, and include ammunition, oils, potions,
scrolls, and talismans, among others. Categories of
items that are consumables but have specific rules,
such as alchemical items, are presented separately.
• Held Items (page 572) include a wide variety of items
you use with your hands. This doesn’t include more
narrow categories of held items, such as weapons.
• Materials (page 577) can be used to make items with
unique properties and other advantages.
• Oils (page 561) are consumables applied to the surface
of an object or person.
• Potions (page 562) are consumable magical liquids
you drink to activate.
• Runes (page 580) modify armor and weapons when
etched onto them. This section includes fundamental
runes for weapons (weapon potency and striking) and
armor (armor potency and resilient).
• Scrolls (page 564) are consumables that allow
spellcasters to cast more spells.
• Shields (page 586) include more durable shields and
ones with special magical powers.
• Snares (page 589) are single-use traps typically made
by rangers.
• Staves (page 592) provide flexible spellcasting options.
• Structures (page 596) include buildings, tents, and
other larger items.
• Talismans (page 565) are consumables that are affixed
to items and then activated for a one-time combat or
physical benefit.
• Wands (page 597) hold a spell of the crafter’s choice,
and can be used to repeatedly cast that spell.
• Weapons (page 599) include the rules for basic magical
weapons, weapons made from precious materials, and
specific magic weapons.
• Worn Items (page 603) consist of a vast collection of
clothing and other items you wear on your body.
533
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
ITEM NAME ITEM [LEVEL]
TRAITS
Price This entry lists the item’s Price. An item that has multiple
types includes Price for each type in its entry.
Ammunition Magic ammunition lists the types of ammunition
available for that kind of item.
Usage This entry describes whether the item is held, worn, or
affixed to or etched onto another item; Bulk The item’s Bulk
is listed here (the rules for Bulk appear on page 271). Runes
don’t have a Bulk entry.
Activate The number of actions needed to Activate the Item
appear here, followed by the components in parentheses.
You can find activation rules on page 532. This entry
appears here for consumables and lower in the stat block
for permanent items that can be activated. This section
might also have Frequency, Trigger, or Requirements
entries as necessary.
Onset This entry appears if the item’s effect is delayed, which
most often occurs with alchemical poisons. The onset is
the amount of time that elapses between when a character
Activates an Item and any effect occurs.
The section after the line describes the item and its constant
abilities. If the item can be activated and doesn’t have an
Activate entry above, that entry appears here in a paragraph
beginning with “Activate.”
Type If multiple types of the item exist, entries here indicate
the name of each type, its level, its Price, and any other
relevant details or alterations from the above description.
Craft Requirements An item that has special requirements to
be Crafted details those requirements here.
Level
An item’s level indicates what level of adventurer the item
is best suited for. There’s no limit to the items a character
can use, though. A 3rd-level character who finds an
item of 4th level or higher while adventuring can use it
normally. Likewise, they can purchase the item if they can
find it for sale and can afford it.
When making items, a character’s level must be equal
to or higher than the item’s level in order to Craft it. In
addition to anything listed in the Craft Requirements
entry in the item’s stat block, the crafter must have the
appropriate skill proficiencies and feats, as well as the
item’s formula; see the Craft activity on page 244 for
more information about these requirements.
Multiple Types
If multiple types of an item exist, the title line gives the
minimum level followed by a plus symbol (“+”). The
description includes information on the base version of the
item, and the Type entries at the bottom of the stat block
lists the specifics for each version, including the level, Price,
and any modified or added abilities of the different types.
For some items, the types listed are upgrades to the base
item. For other items, such as aeon stones and wondrous
figurines, each type is distinct from the others.
like the Sustain a Spell action (found on page 304). If an
item’s description states that you can sustain the effect, that
effect lasts until the end of your turn in the round after you
Activated the Item. You can use a Sustain an Activation
action on that turn to extend the duration.
[one-action] SUSTAIN AN ACTIVATION
CONCENTRATE
Requirements You have at least one magic item activation that
you can sustain, and you are not fatigued.
Choose one magic item activation with a sustained duration
you have in effect. The duration of that activation continues
until the end of your next turn. Some activations may have
slightly different or expanded effects if you sustain them.
Sustaining an Activation for more than 10 minutes (100
rounds) ends the activation and makes you fatigued unless
the item’s description states a different maximum duration
(such as “up to 1 minute” or “up to 1 hour”).
If your Sustain an Activation action is disrupted, the item’s
effect immediately ends.
Dismissing Activations
Some item effects can be dismissed, ending the duration
early due to you or the target taking action. Dismissing
an activation requires using the Dismiss action.
[one-action] DISMISS
CONCENTRATE
You end one spell effect or magic item effect. This must be an
effect that you are allowed to dismiss, as defined by the spell
or item. Dismissal might end the effect entirely, or might end
it just for a certain target or targets, depending on the spell
or item.
Reading Items
Hundreds of items lie ahead. Each item is presented in a
stat block, much like spells or feats. The example below
shows the structure of an item stat block and gives a
brief description of each entry. Entries appear only when
applicable, so not all items will have every entry described
here. Detailed rules governing aspects of the stat block
specific to items appear after the stat block.
ITEM RARITY
Like many other aspects of the rules, items have rarities.
Player characters might find uncommon magic items for
sale, but only infrequently and often by private sellers
or in clandestine markets. Their formulas are often
guarded and not readily available. Unless the GM decides
otherwise, a character cannot purchase rare items, and
their formulas are lost to time.
Rarities for uncommon and rare treasures are indicated
by the first trait in the stat block. Unique items are indicated
in the same way, though there are none in this book.
Core Rulebook
534
Price
If an item is available for purchase, a character can
typically buy it for the listed Price, and the character uses
this Price when they use the Craft activity to make the
item. If a character wants to sell an item, they can sell it
for half its Price (or full Price, if the item was made on
commission), assuming they’re able to find a buyer. The
GM determines whether a buyer is available.
Usage
An item’s stat block includes a Usage entry that indicates
whether a character must be holding or wearing the item
in order to use it, or whether she instead must have it
etched or affixed onto another item.
Held or Worn
If a character must wield the item to use it, this entry in
the item’s stat block lists the word “held” along with the
number of hands the character must use when wielding
the item, such as “held in 1 hand.” The rules for carrying
and using items are provided on page 271.
An item that needs to be worn to function lists “worn”
as its usage. This is followed by another word if the
character is limited to only one of that type of item. For
instance, a character can wear any number of rings, so the
entry for a ring would list only “worn.” However, if the
Usage entry were “worn cloak,” then a character couldn’t
wear another cloak on top of that one. It’s assumed that
items are meant to be worn by humanoids; any item
that can or must be worn by a different type of creature
either states this in its description or has the companion
trait. Most magic items a character must wear have the
invested trait, as described on page 531.
Affixed or Etched
Some items enhance other items. Talismans function
only if affixed to other items. They have a Usage
entry indicating the type or types of items to which a
character can attach them, such as “affixed to armor.”
Rules for affixing a talisman are on page 565.
Runes must be etched onto permanent items, such as
armor, weapons, or runestones (found on page 571) to
grant their benefit. Adding or transferring a rune takes
downtime to accomplish. The Usage entry indicates the
type or types of items a rune can be etched into, such
as “etched onto a weapon.” More information about
etching runes is on page 580.
Craft Requirements
An item might require the crafter to provide specific raw
materials, supply spells, have a certain alignment, or meet
other special requirements to Craft it. These appear in the
Craft Requirements entry of the stat block. Every item
also has default requirements. The crafter must provide
half the item’s Price in raw materials (as explained in
the Craft activity on page 244). In addition, creating
alchemical items requires the Alchemical Crafting feat
(page 258), creating magic items requires the Magical
Crafting feat (page 263), and crafting snares requires the
Snare Crafting feat (page 266). Finally, crafting higherlevel items requires greater proficiency in Crafting.
Unless stated otherwise, creating items of 9th level and
higher requires you to have the master proficiency rank
in Crafting, and items of 16th level and higher require
legendary Crafting.
NOTABLE ITEM TRAITS
The following traits apply to items. Some specific
categories of item have special traits—such as elixir or
scroll—described in their sections.
Alchemical: Alchemical items are powered by the
reactions of alchemical reagents. Alchemical items aren’t
magical, and they don’t radiate a magical aura. Characters
can Craft these items only if they have the Alchemical
Crafting feat (page 258).
Consumable: An item with this trait can be used only
once. Unless stated otherwise, it’s destroyed after activation,
though, part of it might be recoverable for other purposes.
For instance, while a potion is consumable, the vial it comes
in is not destroyed when you drink it. Consumable items
include alchemical items (page 543) as well as ammunition
oils, potions, scrolls, snares, talismans, and other magical
consumables (which begin on page 559).
When a character creates consumable items, she
can make them in batches of four, as described in
Consumables and Ammunition (page 245).
Focused: An item with this trait can give you an
additional Focus Point. This focus point is separate from
your focus pool and doesn’t count toward the cap on your
focus pool. You can gain this benefit only if you have a
focus pool, and there might be restrictions on how the
point can be used. You can’t gain more than 1 Focus
Point per day from focused items, no matter how many
focused items you have.
Invested: A character can wear only 10 magical items
that have the invested trait. None of the magical effects
of the item apply if the character hasn’t invested it,
though the character still gains any normal benefits from
wearing the physical item (like a hat keeping rain off a
character’s head).
Magical: Items with this trait are imbued with magical
energies. Each one radiates a magic aura infused with
its dominant school of magic (abjuration, conjuration,
divination, enchantment, evocation, illusion, necromancy,
or transmutation; these are described on pages 297–298).
A character can craft these items only if she has the
Magical Crafting feat (page 263).
Some items are closely tied to a particular tradition of
magic. In these cases, the item has the arcane, divine,
occult, or primal trait instead of the magical trait. Any of
these traits indicates that the item is magical.
535
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Treasure Table
Table 11–1 lists the items and runes appearing in this
chapter. The table includes all the options of a given
item level, organized by category and name. Each level
has a section for consumables, followed by a section for
permanent items. A superscript “U” indicates the item
is uncommon, and a superscript “R” indicates it’s rare.
TABLE 11–1: TREASURE BY LEVEL
1st-Level Consumables Category Price Page
Shining ammunition Ammunition 3 gp 560
Acid flask, lesser Bomb 3 gp 544
Alchemist’s fire, lesser Bomb 3 gp 545
Bottled lightning, lesser Bomb 3 gp 545
Frost vial, lesser Bomb 3 gp 545
Tanglefoot bag, lesser Bomb 3 gp 545
Thunderstone, lesser Bomb 3 gp 545
Feather token, ladder Consumable 3 gp 570
Holy water Consumable 3 gp 571
Runestone Consumable 3 gp 571
Unholy water Consumable 3 gp 571
Antidote, lesser Elixir 3 gp 546
Antiplague, lesser Elixir 3 gp 546
Bestial mutagen, lesser Elixir 4 gp 546
Cheetah’s elixir, lesser Elixir 3 gp 547
Cognitive mutagen, lesser Elixir 4 gp 547
Eagle-eye elixir, lesser Elixir 4 gp 548
Elixir of life, minor Elixir 3 gp 548
Juggernaut mutagen, lesser Elixir 4 gp 548
Leaper’s elixir, lesser Elixir 3 gp 549
Quicksilver mutagen, lesser Elixir 4 gp 549
Serene mutagen, lesser Elixir 4 gp 549
Silvertongue mutagen, lesser Elixir 4 gp 550
Nectar of purification Oil 3 gp 561
Arsenic Poison 3 gp 550
Giant centipede venom Poison 4 gp 551
Healing potion, minor Potion 4 gp 563
Scroll of 1st-level spell Scroll 4 gp 565
Alarm snare Snare 3 gp 589
Caltrop snare Snare 3 gp 590
Hampering snare Snare 3 gp 590
Marking snare Snare 3 gp 590
Signaling snare Snare 3 gp 591
Spike snare Snare 3 gp 591
Owlbear claw Talisman 3 gp 569
Potency crystal Talisman 4 gp 569
Wolf fang Talisman 4 gp 570
Smokestick, lesser Tool 3 gp 554
Snake oil Tool 2 gp 554
Sunrod Tool 3 gp 554
Tindertwig Tool 2 sp 554
1st-Level Permanent Items Category Price Page
Half plate Armor 18 gp 276
Splint mail Armor 13 gp 276
Everburning torch Held 15 gp 573
Aeon stone, dull grayU Worn 9 gp 604
2nd-Level Consumables Category Price Page
Feather token, holly bush Consumable 6 gp 570
Bravo’s brew, lesser Elixir 7 gp 547
Cat’s eye elixir Elixir 7 gp 547
Comprehension elixir, lesser Elixir 7 gp 547
Darkvision elixir, lesser Elixir 6 gp 547
Infiltrator’s elixir Elixir 6 gp 548
Oil of potency Oil 7 gp 562
Oil of weightlessness Oil 6 gp 562
Belladonna Poison 5 gp 551
Black adder venom Poison 6 gp 551
Lethargy poisonU Poison 7 gp 552
Bronze bull pendant Talisman 7 gp 566
Crying angel pendant Talisman 7 gp 566
Effervescent ampoule Talisman 7 gp 566
Hunter’s bane Talisman 6 gp 567
Jade cat Talisman 6 gp 568
Mesmerizing opal Talisman 7 gp 568
Monkey pin Talisman 6 gp 568
Onyx panther Talisman 7 gp 569
Savior spike Talisman 7 gp 569
Silversheen Tool 6 gp 554
2nd-Level Permanent Items Category Price Page
Full plate Armor 30 gp 276
Wondrous figurine, onyx dog Held 34 gp 576
+1 weapon potency Rune 35 gp 581
Cold iron buckler, low-grade Shield 30 gp 586
Cold iron shield, low-grade Shield 34 gp 586
Silver buckler, low-grade Shield 30 gp 587
Silver shield, low-grade Shield 34 gp 587
+1 weapon Weapon 35 gp 599
Cold iron weapon, low-grade Weapon 40+ gp 599
Silver weapon, low-grade Weapon 40+ gp 599
+1 handwraps of mighty blows Worn 35 gp 611
Brooch of shieldingU Worn 30 gp 607
Hand of the mage Worn 30 gp 611
Hat of disguise Worn 30 gp 611
WayfinderU Worn 28 gp 617
3rd-Level Consumables Category Price Page
Beacon shot Ammunition 10 gp 559
Sleep arrow Ammunition 11 gp 560
Spellstrike ammunition 1st Ammunition 12 gp 560
Vine arrow Ammunition 10 gp 560
Acid flask, moderate Bomb 10 gp 544
Alchemist’s fire, moderate Bomb 10 gp 545
Bottled lightning, moderate Bomb 10 gp 545
Frost vial, moderate Bomb 10 gp 545
Tanglefoot bag, moderate Bomb 10 gp 545
Thunderstone, moderate Bomb 10 gp 545
Feather token, bird Consumable 8 gp 570
Feather token, chest Consumable 10 gp 570
Bestial mutagen, moderate Elixir 12 gp 546
Cognitive mutagen, moderate Elixir 12 gp 547
Juggernaut mutagen, moderate Elixir 12 gp 548
Quicksilver mutagen, moderate Elixir 12 gp 549
Serene mutagen, moderate Elixir 12 gp 549
Silvertongue mutagen, moderate Elixir 12 gp 550
Core Rulebook
536
Oil of mending Oil 9 gp 561
Cytillesh oil Poison 10 gp 551
Graveroot Poison 10 gp 552
Healing potion, lesser Potion 12 gp 563
Potion of water breathing Potion 11 gp 564
Scroll of 2nd-level spell Scroll 12 gp 565
Feather step stone Talisman 8 gp 567
3rd-Level Permanent Items Category Price Page
Maestro’s instrument, lesser Held 60 gp 574
Thurible of revelation, lesser Held 55 gp 575
Returning Rune 55 gp 584
Shadow Rune 55 gp 583
Slick Rune 45 gp 583
Staff of fire Staff 60 gp 594
Wand of 1st-level spell Wand 60 gp 597
Fighter’s fork Weapon 50 gp 600
Retribution axe Weapon 60 gp 602
Bracelet of dashing Worn 58 gp 607
Bracers of missile deflection Worn 52 gp 607
Channel protection amulet
U Worn 56 gp 608
Coyote cloak Worn 60 gp 609
Crafter’s eyepiece Worn 60 gp 609
Dancing scarf Worn 60 gp 609
Doubling rings Worn 50 gp 609
Hat of the magi Worn 50 gp 611
Pendant of the occult Worn 60 gp 613
Persona mask Worn 50 gp 613
Tracker’s goggles Worn 60 gp 616
Ventriloquist’s ring Worn 60 gp 617
4th-Level Consumables Category Price Page
Climbing bolt Ammunition 15 gp 559
Viper arrow Ammunition 17 gp 561
Feather token, fan Consumable 15 gp 570
Bomber’s eye elixir, lesser Elixir 14 gp 547
Darkvision elixir, moderate Elixir 11 gp 547
Mistform elixir, lesser Elixir 18 gp 549
Salamander elixir, lesser Elixir 15 gp 549
Stone fist elixir Elixir 13 gp 550
Winter wolf elixir, lesser Elixir 15 gp 550
Barkskin potion Potion 15 gp 562
Invisibility potion
U Potion 20 gp 563
Shrinking potion, standard Potion 15 gp 564
Biting snare Snare 15 gp 589
Hobbling snare
U Snare 15 gp 590
Stalker bane snare
U Snare 15 gp 591
Trip snare Snare 15 gp 591
Warning snare Snare 15 gp 591
Bloodseeker beak Talisman 20 gp 565
Dragon turtle scale Talisman 13 gp 566
Fear gem Talisman 20 gp 566
4th-Level Permanent Items Category Price Page
Bag of holding type I Held 75 gp 572
Ghost touch Rune 75 gp 584
Striking Rune 65 gp 581
Sturdy shield, minor Shield 100 gp 588
Animal staff Staff 90 gp 592
Mentalist’s staff Staff 90 gp 592
Staff of healing Staff 90 gp 594
Wand of widening 1st Wand 100 gp 598
+1 striking weapon Weapon 100 gp 599
Alchemist goggles Worn 100 gp 605
+1 striking handwraps of
mighty blows
Worn 100 gp 611
Demon mask Worn 85 gp 609
Healer’s gloves Worn 80 gp 612
Lifting belt Worn 80 gp 613
5th-Level Consumables Category Price Page
Spellstrike ammunition 2nd Ammunition 30 gp 560
Cheetah’s elixir, moderate Elixir 25 gp 547
Eagle-eye elixir, moderate Elixir 27 gp 548
Elixir of life, lesser Elixir 30 gp 548
Sea touch elixir, lesser Elixir 22 gp 549
Salve of slipperiness Oil 25 gp 562
Hunting spider venom Poison 25 gp 552
Potion of leaping Potion 21 gp 563
Scroll of 3rd-level spell Scroll 30 gp 565
Emerald grasshopper Talisman 30 gp 566
Shark tooth charm Talisman 23 gp 569
Sneaky key Talisman 22 gp 569
Tiger menuki Talisman 30 gp 569
5th-Level Permanent Items Category Price Page
+1 armor Armor 160 gp 556
Cold iron armor, low-grade Armor 140+ gp 555
Silver armor, low-grade Armor 140+ gp 556
Holy prayer beads, standard
U Held 160 gp 573
Skeleton key, standard Held 125 gp 575
+1 armor potency Rune 160 gp 581
Glamered Rune 140 gp 583
Disrupting Rune 150 gp 584
Pocket stage Structure 138 gp 596
Wand of 2nd-level spell Wand 160 gp 597
Wand of continuation 1st Wand 160 gp 598
Wand of manifold missiles 1st Wand 160 gp 598
Caterwaul sling Weapon 155 gp 600
Dagger of venom Weapon 150 gp 600
Boots of elvenkind Worn 145 gp 606
Diplomat’s badge Worn 125 gp 609
Goggles of night Worn 150 gp 610
Necklace of fireballs type I Worn 44 gp 613
6th-Level Consumables Category Price Page
Dust of appearance Consumable 50 gp 570
Feather token, tree Consumable 38 gp 570
Antidote, moderate Elixir 35 gp 546
Antiplague, moderate Elixir 35 gp 546
Mistform elixir, moderate Elixir 56 gp 549
Oil of weightlessness, greater Oil 36 gp 562
Salve of antiparalysis Oil 40 gp 562
Giant scorpion venom Poison 40 gp 551
Healing potion, moderate Potion 50 gp 563
Potion of resistance, lesser Potion 45 gp 563
Potion of swimming, moderate Potion 50 gp 563
Truth potion
U Potion 46 gp 564
Iron cube Talisman 50 gp 567
537
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
6th-Level Permanent Items Category Price Page
Ghoul hide
U Armor 220 gp 558
Chime of opening
U Held 235 gp 572
Horn of fog Held 230 gp 573
Primeval mistletoe, standard Held 230 gp 574
Traveler’s any-tool Held 200 gp 576
Shifting Rune 225 gp 585
Lion’s shield Shield 245 gp 588
Spellguard Shield Shield 250 gp 588
Staff of abjuration Staff 230 gp 593
Staff of conjuration Staff 230 gp 593
Staff of divination Staff 230 gp 593
Staff of enchantment Staff 230 gp 593
Staff of evocation Staff 230 gp 593
Staff of illusion Staff 230 gp 594
Staff of necromancy Staff 230 gp 594
Staff of transmutation Staff 230 gp 595
Verdant staff Staff 225 gp 595
Wand of widening 2nd Wand 250 gp 598
Bloodletting kukri
U Weapon 240 gp 600
Twining staff Weapon 250 gp 602
Aeon stone, gold nodule
U Worn 230 gp 604
Choker of elocution Worn 200 gp 608
Clandestine cloak
U Worn 230 gp 608
Ring of energy resistance Worn 245 gp 614
Ring of the ram Worn 220 gp 615
7th-Level Consumables Category Price Page
Spellstrike ammunition 3rd Ammunition 70 gp 560
Feather token, anchor Consumable 55 gp 570
Comprehension elixir, greater Elixir 54 gp 547
Leaper’s elixir, greater Elixir 55 gp 549
Giant wasp venom Poison 55 gp 552
Malyass root paste Poison 55 gp 552
Dragon’s breath potion, young Potion 70 gp 562
Serum of sex shift Potion 60 gp 564
Scroll of 4th-level spell Scroll 70 gp 565
Grim trophy Talisman 55 gp 567
Murderer’s knot Talisman 66 gp 568
Swift block cabochon
U Talisman 70 gp 569
Smokestick, greater Tool 53 gp 554
7th-Level Permanent Items Category Price Page
Moonlit chain Armor 360 gp 558
Horseshoes of speed Companion 340 gp 604
Bag of holding type II Held 300 gp 572
Bottled air Held 320 gp 572
Decanter of endless water Held 320 gp 573
Wondrous figurine, jade serpent Held 340 gp 576
Wounding Rune 340 gp 585
Cold iron buckler, standard-grade Shield 300 gp 586
Cold iron shield, standard-grade Shield 340 gp 586
Silver buckler, standard-grade Shield 300 gp 587
Silver shield, standard-grade Shield 340 gp 587
Spined shield Shield 360 gp 588
Sturdy shield, lesser Shield 360 gp 588
Wand of 3rd-level spell Wand 360 gp 597
Wand of continuation 2nd Wand 360 gp 598
Aeon stone, clear spindle
U Worn 325 gp 604
Aeon stone, tourmaline sphere
U Worn 350 gp 604
Boots of bounding Worn 340 gp 606
Cloak of elvenkind Worn 360 gp 608
Gloves of storing
U Worn 340 gp 610
Hat of disguise, greater Worn 340 gp 611
Necklace of fireballs type II Worn 115 gp 613
Ring of sustenance
U Worn 325 gp 615
Ring of wizardry type I
U Worn 360 gp 615
Slippers of spider climbing Worn 325 gp 616
8th-Level Consumables Category Price Page
Candle of truth
U Consumable 75 gp 570
Feather token, swan boat Consumable 76 gp 570
Darkvision elixir, greater Elixir 90 gp 547
Nettleweed residue Poison 75 gp 553
Wyvern poison Poison 80 gp 554
Potion of flying, standard Potion 100 gp 563
Potion of quickness Potion 90 gp 563
Shrinking potion, greater Potion 90 gp 564
Bomb snare Snare 75 gp 589
Grasping snare
U Snare 75 gp 590
Striking snare Snare 75 gp 591
Gallows tooth Talisman 100 gp 567
Jade bauble Talisman 100 gp 568
8th-Level Permanent Items Category Price Page
+1 resilient armor Armor 500 gp 556
Collar of inconspicuousness Companion 475 gp 604
Rod of wonder
R Held 465 gp 575
Corrosive Rune 500 gp 583
Energy-resistant Rune 420 gp 582
Flaming Rune 500 gp 584
Frost Rune 500 gp 584
Invisibility Rune 500 gp 583
Resilient Rune 340 gp 581
Shock Rune 500 gp 585
Slick, greater Rune 450 gp 583
Thundering Rune 500 gp 585
Adamantine buckler,
standard-grade
U
Shield 400 gp 586
Adamantine shield,
standard-grade
U
Shield 440 gp 586
Darkwood buckler,
standard-grade
U
Shield 400 gp 586
Darkwood shield,
standard-grade
U Shield 440 gp 586
Darkwood tower shield,
standard-grade
U
Shield 560 gp 586
Dragonhide buckler,
standard-grade
U
Shield 400 gp 586
Dragonhide shield,
standard-grade
U
Shield 440 gp 586
Mithral buckler, standard-grade
U Shield 400 gp 586
Mithral shield, standard-grade
U Shield 440 gp 586
Animal staff, greater Staff 460 gp 592
Mentalist’s staff, greater Staff 450 gp 592
Staff of fire, greater Staff 450 gp 594
Staff of healing, greater Staff 470 gp 594
Staff of illumination Staff 425 gp 594
Wand of smoldering fireballs 3rd Wand 500 gp 598
Core Rulebook
538
Wand of widening 3rd Wand 500 gp 598
Bracers of armor type I Worn 450 gp 607
9th-Level Consumables Category Price Page
Explosive ammunition, standard Ammunition 130 gp 559
Spellstrike ammunition 4th Ammunition 150 gp 560
Storm arrow Ammunition 130 gp 560
Dust of disappearance Consumable 135 gp 570
Feather token, whip Consumable 130 gp 570
Javelin of lightning Consumable 110 gp 571
Cheetah’s elixir, greater Elixir 110 gp 547
Elixir of life, moderate Elixir 150 gp 548
Aligned oil Oil 140 gp 561
Lich dust Poison 110 gp 552
Spider root Poison 110 gp 553
Scroll of 5th-level spell Scroll 150 gp 565
9th-Level Permanent Items Category Price Page
Rhino hide Armor 700 gp 558
Collar of empathy Companion 600 gp 604
Horn of blasting Held 700 gp 573
Immovable rod Held 600 gp 574
Triton’s conch Held 640 gp 576
Grievous Rune 700 gp 584
Shadow, greater Rune 650 gp 583
Dragonslayer’s ShieldU Shield 670 gp 587
Force shieldU Shield 650 gp 587
Wand of 4th-level spell Wand 700 gp 597
Wand of continuation 3rd Wand 700 gp 598
Wand of manifold missiles 3rd Wand 700 gp 598
Gloom blade Weapon 700 gp 601
Armbands of athleticism Worn 645 gp 605
Belt of the five kingsU Worn 650 gp 606
Bracers of missile deflection,
greater
Worn 650 gp 607
Coyote cloak, greater Worn 650 gp 609
Dancing scarf, greater Worn 650 gp 609
Eye of the eagle Worn 700 gp 610
Hat of the magi, greater Worn 650 gp 611
Healer’s gloves, greater Worn 700 gp 612
Knapsack of halflingkindU Worn 675 gp 612
Messenger’s ring Worn 700 gp 613
Necklace of fireballs type III Worn 300 gp 613
Pendant of the occult, greater Worn 650 gp 613
Persona mask, greater Worn 650 gp 613
Phylactery of faithfulness Worn 680 gp 614
Tracker’s goggles, greater Worn 660 gp 616
Ventriloquist’s ring, greater Worn 670 gp 617
10th-Level Consumables Category Price Page
Elemental gem Consumable 200 gp 570
Antidote, greater Elixir 160 gp 546
Antiplague, greater Elixir 160 gp 546
Bravo’s brew, moderate Elixir 150 gp 547
Eagle-eye elixir, greater Elixir 200 gp 548
Mistform elixir, greater Elixir 180 gp 549
Shadow Essence Poison 160 gp 553
Wolfsbane Poison 155 gp 553
Potion of resistance, moderate Potion 180 gp 563
Iron medallion Talisman 175 gp 568
Mummified bat Talisman 175 gp 568
Vanishing coin Talisman 160 gp 569
10th-Level Permanent Items Category Price Page
Breastplate of command Armor 1,000 gp 557
Electric eelskin Armor 950 gp 557
Barding of the zephyr Companion 900 gp 604
Maestro’s instrument, moderate Held 900 gp 574
Thurible of revelation, moderate Held 900 gp 575
Wondrous figurine, golden lions Held 900 gp 576
+2 weapon potency Rune 935 gp 581
Invisibility, greater Rune 1,000 gp 583
Forge wardenU Shield 975 gp 587
Sturdy shield, moderate Shield 1,000 gp 588
Staff of abjuration, greater Staff 900 gp 593
Staff of conjuration, greater Staff 900 gp 593
Staff of divination, greater Staff 900 gp 593
Staff of enchantment, greater Staff 900 gp 593
Staff of evocation, greater Staff 900 gp 593
Staff of illusion, greater Staff 900 gp 594
Staff of necromancy, greater Staff 900 gp 594
Staff of transmutation, greater Staff 900 gp 595
Explorer’s yurt Structure 880 gp 596
Wand of widening 4th Wand 1,000 gp 598
+2 striking weapon Weapon 1,000 gp 599
Cold iron weapon, standard-grade Weapon 880+ gp 599
Silver weapon, standard-grade Weapon 880+ gp 599
+2 striking handwraps of
mighty blows
Worn 1,000 gp 611
Cape of the mountebankU Worn 980 gp 607
Choker of elocution, greater Worn 850 gp 608
Clandestine cloak, greaterU Worn 900 gp 608
Cloak of the bat Worn 950 gp 608
Daredevil boots Worn 900 gp 609
Demon mask, greater Worn 900 gp 609
Druid’s vestments Worn 1,000 gp 610
Ring of counterspellsU Worn 925 gp 614
Ring of energy resistance,
greater Worn 975 gp 614
Ring of liesU Worn 850 gp 614
Ring of wizardry type IIU Worn 1,000 gp 615
Winged boots Worn 850 gp 617
11th-Level Consumables Category Price Page
Spellstrike ammunition 5th Ammunition 300 gp 560
Acid flask, greater Bomb 250 gp 544
Alchemist’s fire, greater Bomb 250 gp 545
Bottled lightning, greater Bomb 250 gp 545
Frost vial, greater Bomb 250 gp 545
Tanglefoot bag, greater Bomb 250 gp 545
Thunderstone, greater Bomb 250 gp 545
Bestial mutagen, greater Elixir 300 gp 546
Cognitive mutagen, greater Elixir 300 gp 547
Juggernaut mutagen, greater Elixir 300 gp 548
Quicksilver mutagen, greater Elixir 300 gp 549
Serene mutagen, greater Elixir 300 gp 549
Silvertongue mutagen, greater Elixir 300 gp 550
Oil of keen edgesU Oil 250 gp 561
Oil of repulsion Oil 175 gp 562
539
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Blightburn resin Poison 225 gp 551
Potion of swimming, greater Potion 250 gp 563
Scroll of 6th-level spell Scroll 300 gp 565
11th-Level Permanent Items Category Price Page
+2 resilient armor Armor 1,400 gp 556
Cold iron armor, standard-grade Armor 1,200+ gp 555
Silver armor, standard-grade Armor 1,200+ gp 556
Bag of holding type III Held 1,200 gp 572
Holy prayer beads, greater
U Held 1,400 gp 573
Skeleton key, greater Held 1,250 gp 575
+2 armor potency Rune 1,060 gp 581
Anarchic Rune 1,400 gp 583
Axiomatic Rune 1,400 gp 583
Holy Rune 1,400 gp 584
Unholy Rune 1,400 gp 585
Arrow-catching shield Shield 1,350 gp 587
Floating shield
U Shield 1,250 gp 587
Wand of 5th-level spell Wand 1,500 gp 597
Wand of continuation 4th Wand 1,400 gp 598
Adamantine weapon,
standard-grade
U
Weapon 1,400+ gp 599
Darkwood weapon,
standard-grade
U
Weapon 1,400+ gp 599
Mithral weapon,
standard-grade
U Weapon 1,400+ gp 599
Oathbow Weapon 1,300 gp 602
Alchemist goggles, greater Worn 1,400 gp 605
Boots of elvenkind, greater Worn 1,250 gp 606
Cassock of devotion Worn 1,150 gp 607
Crafter’s eyepiece, greater Worn 1,200 gp 609
Doubling rings, greater Worn 1,300 gp 609
Goggles of night, greater Worn 1,250 gp 610
Gorget of the primal roar Worn 1,250 gp 611
Necklace of fireballs type IV Worn 700 gp 613
Ring of maniacal devices Worn 1,175 gp 614
12th-Level Consumables Category Price Page
Penetrating ammunition Ammunition 400 gp 560
Salamander elixir, moderate Elixir 320 gp 549
Sea touch elixir, moderate Elixir 300 gp 549
Winter wolf elixir, moderate Elixir 320 gp 550
Oil of animation
U Oil 330 gp 561
Salve of antiparalysis, greater Oil 325 gp 562
Slumber wine Poison 325 gp 553
Dragon’s breath potion, adult Potion 400 gp 562
Healing potion, greater Potion 400 gp 563
Potion of tongues
U Potion 320 gp 563
Bleeding spines snare Snare 320 gp 589
Scything blade snare Snare 320 gp 591
Stunning snare Snare 320 gp 591
Eye of apprehension Talisman 400 gp 566
Fade band Talisman 320 gp 566
Iron equalizer Talisman 400 gp 567
12th-Level Permanent Items Category Price Page
Adamantine armor,
standard-grade
U
Armor 1,600+ gp 555
Darkwood armor,
standard-grade
U
Armor 1,600+ gp 555
Dragonhide armor,
standard-grade
U
Armor 1,600+ gp 555
Mithral armor, standard-grade
U Armor 1,600+ gp 556
Broom of flying Held 1,900 gp 572
Marvelous medicines, standard Held 1,800 gp 574
Energy-resistant, greater Rune 1,650 gp 582
Fortification Rune 2,000 gp 582
Striking, greater Rune 1,065 gp 581
Animal staff, major Staff 1,900 gp 592
Mentalist’s staff, major Staff 1,800 gp 592
Staff of fire, major Staff 1,800 gp 594
Staff of healing, major Staff 1,800 gp 594
Verdant staff, greater Staff 1,750 gp 595
Wand of smoldering fireballs 5th Wand 2,000 gp 598
Wand of widening 5th Wand 2,000 gp 598
+2 greater striking weapon Weapon 2,000 gp 599
+2 greater striking handwraps of
mighty blows
Worn 2,000 gp 611
Aeon stone, pink rhomboid
U Worn 1,900 gp 604
Berserker’s cloak Worn 2,000 gp 606
Cloak of elvenkind, greater Worn 1,750 gp 608
Ring of climbing Worn 1,750 gp 614
Ring of swimming Worn 1,750 gp 615
Ring of wizardry type III
U Worn 2,000 gp 615
13th-Level Consumables Category Price Page
Explosive ammunition, greater Ammunition 520 gp 559
Spellstrike ammunition 6th Ammunition 600 gp 560
Elixir of life, greater Elixir 600 gp 548
Deathcap powder Poison 450 gp 551
Purple worm venom Poison 500 gp 553
Panacea
U Potion 450 gp 563
Scroll of 7th-level spell Scroll 600 gp 565
Mending lattice
U Talisman 525 gp 568
13th-Level Permanent Items Category Price Page
Celestial armor Armor 2,500 gp 557
Demon armor Armor 2,500 gp 557
Elven chain, standard-grade
U Armor 2,500 gp 555
Mail of luck Armor 2,600 gp 558
Bag of holding type IV Held 2,400 gp 572
Wondrous figurine,
marble elephant
Held 2,700 gp 576
Dancing
U Rune 2,700 gp 583
Keen
U Rune 3,000 gp 584
Spell-storing
U Rune 2,700 gp 585
Sturdy shield, greater Shield 3,000 gp 588
Wand of 6th-level spell Wand 3,000 gp 597
Wand of continuation 5th Wand 3,000 gp 598
Wand of manifold missiles 5th Wand 3,000 gp 598
Dwarven thrower Weapon 2,750 gp 600
Flame tongue Weapon 2,800 gp 600
Aeon stone, pale
lavender ellipsoid
U
Worn 2,200 gp 604
Boots of speed Worn 3,000 gp 606
Eye of fortune Worn 2,700 gp 610
Knapsack of halflingkind,
greater
U
Worn 2,850 gp 612
Necklace of fireballs type V Worn 1,600 gp 613
Ring of the ram, greater Worn 2,700 gp 615
Core Rulebook
540
14th-Level Consumables Category Price Page
Ghost ammunition Ammunition 900 gp 559
Antidote, major Elixir 675 gp 546
Antiplague, major Elixir 675 gp 546
Bomber’s eye elixir, greater Elixir 700 gp 547
Potion of resistance, greater Potion 850 gp 563
Dazing Coil Talisman 900 gp 566
Iron cudgel Talisman 900 gp 567
Viper’s fang Talisman 850 gp 569
14th-Level Permanent Items Category Price Page
+2 greater resilient armor Armor 4,500 gp 556
Horseshoes of speed, greater Companion 4,250 gp 604
Crystal ball, clear quartzU Held 3,800 gp 572
Primeval mistletoe, greater Held 3,900 gp 574
Rod of negation Held 4,300 gp 574
Disrupting, greaterU Rune 4,300 gp 584
Resilient, greater Rune 3,440 gp 581
Staff of abjuration, major Staff 4,000 gp 593
Staff of conjuration, major Staff 4,000 gp 593
Staff of divination, major Staff 4,000 gp 593
Staff of enchantment, major Staff 4,000 gp 593
Staff of evocation, major Staff 4,000 gp 593
Staff of illusion, major Staff 4,000 gp 594
Staff of necromancy, major Staff 4,000 gp 594
Staff of transmutation, major Staff 4,000 gp 595
Wand of widening 6th Wand 4,500 gp 598
Holy avengerU Weapon 4,500 gp 601
Storm flash Weapon 4,000 gp 602
Boots of bounding, greater Worn 4,250 gp 606
Bracers of armor type II Worn 4,000 gp 607
Ring of energy resistance, major Worn 4,400 gp 614
Ring of wizardry type IVU Worn 4,500 gp 615
15th-Level Consumables Category Price Page
Disintegration boltU Ammunition 1,300 gp 559
Spellstrike ammunition 7th Ammunition 1,300 gp 560
Stone bullet Ammunition 1,300 gp 560
Bravo’s brew, greater Elixir 700 gp 547
Elixir of life, major Elixir 1,300 gp 548
Sea touch elixir, greater Elixir 920 gp 549
Obfuscation oil Oil 1,200 gp 561
Dragon bile Poison 925 gp 551
Mindfog mist Poison 1,000 gp 553
Potion of flying, greater Potion 1,000 gp 563
Scroll of 8th-level spell Scroll 1,300 gp 565
15th-Level Permanent Items Category Price Page
Plate armor of the deepU Armor 6,500 gp 558
Crystal ball, seleniteU Held 7,000 gp 572
Wondrous figurine,
obsidian steedU
Held 6,000 gp 576
AntimagicU Rune 6,500 gp 582
Corrosive, greater Rune 6,500 gp 583
Flaming, greater Rune 6,500 gp 584
Frost, greater Rune 6,500 gp 584
Shock, greater Rune 6,500 gp 585
Thundering, greater Rune 6,500 gp 585
Cold iron buckler, high-grade Shield 5,000 gp 586
Cold iron shield, high-grade Shield 5,500 gp 586
Silver buckler, high-grade Shield 5,000 gp 587
Silver shield, high-grade Shield 5,500 gp 587
Wand of 7th-level spell Wand 6,500 gp 597
Wand of continuation 6th Wand 6,500 gp 598
Necklace of fireballs type VI Worn 4,200 gp 613
Robe of the archmagiU Worn 6,500 gp 616
16th-Level Consumables Category Price Page
Eagle-eye elixir, major Elixir 2,000 gp 548
Salamander elixir, greater Elixir 1,400 gp 549
Winter wolf elixir, greater Elixir 1,400 gp 550
Brimstone fumes Poison 1,500 gp 551
Nightmare vapor Poison 1,400 gp 553
Truesight potion Potion 1,500 gp 564
Hail of arrows snare Snare 1,500 gp 590
Omnidirectional spear snare Snare 1,500 gp 591
Flame navette Talisman 1,800 gp 567
Ghost dust Talisman 1,800 gp 567
16th-Level Permanent Items Category Price Page
DragonplateU Armor 10,000 gp 557
Crystal ball, moonstoneU Held 7,500 gp 572
+3 weapon potency Rune 8,935 gp 581
Slick, major Rune 9,000 gp 583
SpeedR Rune 10,000 gp 585
Adamantine buckler, high-gradeU Shield 8,000 gp 586
Adamantine shield, high-gradeU Shield 8,800 gp 586
Darkwood buckler, high-gradeU Shield 8,000 gp 586
Darkwood shield, high-gradeU Shield 8,800 gp 586
Darkwood tower shield,
high-gradeU
Shield 11,200 gp 586
Dragonhide buckler, high-gradeU Shield 8,000 gp 586
Dragonhide shield, high-gradeU Shield 8,800 gp 586
Floating shield, greater Shield 9,000 gp 587
Mithral buckler, high-gradeU Shield 8,000 gp 586
Mithral shield, high-gradeU Shield 8,800 gp 586
Sturdy shield, major Shield 10,000 gp 588
Staff of healing, true Staff 9,200 gp 594
Staff of powerR Staff 10,000 gp 595
Instant fortressU Structure 9,300 gp 596
Wand of slaying 7th Wand 10,000 gp 598
Wand of smoldering fireballs 7th Wand 10,000 gp 598
Wand of widening 7th Wand 10,000 gp 598
+3 greater striking weapon Weapon 10,000 gp 599
Cold iron weapon, high-grade Weapon 9,000+ gp 599
Frost brand Weapon 10,000 gp 601
Silver weapon, high-grade Weapon 9,000+ gp 599
+3 greater striking handwraps of
mighty blows
Worn 10,000 gp 611
Aeon stone, orange prismU Worn 9,750 gp 604
17th-Level Consumables Category Price Page
Spellstrike ammunition 8th Ammunition 3,000 gp 560
Acid flask, major Bomb 2,500 gp 544
Alchemist’s fire, major Bomb 2,500 gp 545
Bottled lightning, major Bomb 2,500 gp 545
Frost vial, major Bomb 2,500 gp 545
Tanglefoot bag, major Bomb 2,500 gp 545
Thunderstone, major Bomb 2,500 gp 545
Bestial mutagen, major Elixir 3,000 gp 546
541
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Cognitive mutagen, major Elixir 3,000 gp 547
Juggernaut mutagen, major Elixir 3,000 gp 548
Quicksilver mutagen, major Elixir 3,000 gp 549
Serene mutagen, major Elixir 3,000 gp 549
Silvertongue mutagen, major Elixir 3,000 gp 550
Hemlock Poison 2,250 gp 552
Dragon’s breath potion, wyrm Potion 3,000 gp 562
Scroll of 9th-level spell Scroll 3,000 gp 565
Dispelling sliver Talisman 2,400 gp 566
17th-Level Permanent Items Category Price Page
Anklets of alacrity Apex 15,000 gp 603
Belt of giant strength Apex 15,000 gp 603
Belt of regeneration Apex 15,000 gp 603
Circlet of persuasion Apex 15,000 gp 603
Diadem of intellect Apex 15,000 gp 603
Headband of inspired wisdom Apex 15,000 gp 604
Impenetrable scaleU Armor 12,800 gp 558
Crystal ball, peridotU Held 12,500 gp 572
EtherealU Rune 13,500 gp 582
Shadow, major Rune 14,000 gp 583
VorpalR Rune 15,000 gp 585
Orichalcum buckler, high-gradeR Shield 12,000 gp 587
Orichalcum shield, high-gradeR Shield 13,200 gp 587
Wand of 8th-level spell Wand 15,000 gp 597
Wand of continuation 7th Wand 15,000 gp 598
Wand of manifold missiles 7th Wand 15,000 gp 598
Adamantine weapon,
high-gradeU
Weapon 13,500+ gp 599
Darkwood weapon, high-gradeU Weapon 13,500+ gp 599
Flame tongue, greater Weapon 13,800 gp 600
Luck bladeR Weapon 15,000 gp 601
Mithral weapon, high-gradeU Weapon 13,500+ gp 599
Alchemist goggles, major Worn 15,000 gp 605
Armbands of athleticism, greater Worn 13,000 gp 605
Cloak of the bat, greater Worn 13,000 gp 608
Daredevil boots, greater Worn 14,000 gp 609
Dread blindfold Worn 15,000 gp 610
Messenger’s ring, greater Worn 13,500 gp 613
Necklace of fireballs type VII Worn 9,600 gp 613
Phylactery of faithfulness,
greater
Worn 13,000 gp 614
Robe of eyesU Worn 13,000 gp 615
Voyager’s packU Worn 14,800 gp 617
18th-Level Consumables Category Price Page
King’s sleep Poison 4,000 gp 552
Healing potion, major Potion 5,000 gp 563
Potion of undetectability Potion 4,400 gp 563
18th-Level Permanent Items Category Price Page
+3 greater resilient armor Armor 24,000 gp 556
Breastplate of command, greater Armor 22,000 gp 557
Cold iron armor, high-grade Armor 20,000+ gp 555
Silver armor, high-grade Armor 20,000+ gp 556
Maestro’s instrument, greater Held 19,000 gp 574
Marvelous medicines, greater Held 19,000 gp 574
Possibility tome Held 22,000 gp 574
Thurible of revelation, greater Held 19,000 gp 575
+3 armor potency Rune 20,560 gp 581
Fortification, greater Rune 24,000 gp 582
Indestructible shieldR Shield 24,000 gp 588
Reflecting shieldU Shield 18,000 gp 588
Wand of slaying 8th Wand 24,000 gp 598
Wand of widening 8th Wand 24,000 gp 598
Orichalcum weapon, high-gradeR Weapon 22,500+ gp 599
Storm flash, greater Weapon 21,000 gp 602
Goggles of night, major Worn 20,000 gp 610
Inexplicable apparatus Worn 19,000 gp 612
Ring of maniacal devices, greater Worn 4,250 gp 614
19th-Level Consumables Category Price Page
Spellstrike ammunition 9th Ammunition 8,000 gp 560
Elixir of life, true Elixir 3,000 gp 548
Black lotus extract Poison 6,500 gp 551
Scroll of 10th-level spellU Scroll 8,000 gp 565
19th-Level Permanent Items Category Price Page
Adamantine armor, high-gradeU Armor 32,000+ gp 555
Darkwood armor, high-gradeU Armor 32,000+ gp 555
Dragonhide armor, high-gradeU Armor 32,000+ gp 555
Mithral armor, high-gradeU Armor 32,000+ gp 556
Crystal ball, obsidianU Held 32,000 gp 572
Striking, major Rune 31,065 gp 581
Sturdy shield, supreme Shield 40,000 gp 588
Wand of 9th-level spell Wand 40,000 gp 597
Wand of continuation 8th Wand 40,000 gp 598
+3 major striking weapon Weapon 40,000 gp 599
Luck blade, wishingR Weapon 30,000 gp 601
Mattock of the titansU Weapon 36,000 gp 601
+3 major striking handwraps of
mighty blows
Worn 40,000 gp 611
Aeon stone, lavender and
green ellipsoidU
Worn 30,000 gp 604
Berserker’s cloak, greater Worn 40,000 gp 606
Robe of the archmagi, greaterU Worn 32,000 gp 616
Third eye Worn 40,000 gp 616
20th-Level Consumables Category Price Page
Elixir of rejuvenationU Elixir — 548
Antimagic oilR Oil 13,000 gp 561
Tears of death Poison 12,000 gp 553
Flying blade wheel snare Snare 10,000 gp 590
Instant evisceration snare Snare 10,000 gp 590
Philosopher’s stoneU Tool — 554
20th-Level Permanent Items Category Price Page
+3 major resilient armor Armor 70,000 gp 556
Elven chain, high-gradeU Armor 52,000+ gp 555
Orichalcum armor, high-gradeR Armor 55,000+ gp 556
Resilient, major Rune 49,440 gp 581
Staff of the magiR Staff 90,000 gp 595
Wand of slaying 9th Wand 70,000 gp 598
Wand of smoldering fireballs 9th Wand 70,000 gp 598
Wand of widening 9th Wand 70,000 gp 598
SkyhammerR Weapon 70,000 gp 602
Bracers of armor type III Worn 60,000 gp 607
Ring of spell turningR Worn 67,000 gp 615
Whisper of the first lieR Worn 60,000 gp 617
Core Rulebook
542
Alchemical Items
Alchemical items are not magical. They instead use the
properties of volatile chemicals, exotic minerals, potent
plants, and other substances, collectively referred to as
alchemical reagents. As such, alchemical items don’t
radiate magical auras, and they can’t be dismissed
or affected by dispel magic. Their effects last for a set
amount of time or until they are countered in some way,
typically physically.
Sometimes the reactions of alchemical reagents create
effects that seem magical, and at other times they straddle
the line between purely reactive and the inexplicable.
Alchemists can infuse reagents with some of their own
essence, allowing them to efficiently create short-lived
alchemical items at no monetary cost. Even in these cases,
alchemical items don’t radiate magic auras, instead using
the alchemist’s infused essence as one additional catalyst
for the item’s alchemical effects.
Rules for creating alchemical items are found in the
Craft activity on page 244, and you must have the
Alchemical Crafting skill feat to use Crafting to create
alchemical items. Critically failing a Crafting check to
make alchemical items often causes a dangerous effect,
such as an explosion for a bomb or accidental exposure
for a poison, in addition to losing some of the materials.
Some alchemical items have additional requirements
beyond those stated in the Craft activity; these items list
their requirements in a Craft Requirements entry.
All alchemical items have the alchemical trait. Most
also have the consumable trait, which means that the item
is used up once activated. The bomb, elixir, and poison
traits indicate special categories of alchemical items, each
of which is described on the following pages. Alchemical
items without any of these traits are called alchemical
tools, and are described further on page 554.
This section contains the following subcategories.
Special rules appear at the start of the relevant section.
• Alchemical bombs appear on page 544.
• Alchemical elixirs are listed on page 546.
• Alchemical poisons begin on page 550.
• Alchemical tools can be found on page 554.
TABLE 11–2: ALCHEMICAL ITEMS BY LEVEL
Table 11–2 lists alchemical items arranged by level and
category, as a reference primarily for alchemist characters.
Level Item Category Page
1 Acid flask, lesser Bomb 544
1 Alchemist’s fire, lesser Bomb 545
1 Bottled lightning, lesser Bomb 545
1 Frost vial, lesser Bomb 545
1 Tanglefoot bag, lesser Bomb 545
1 Thunderstone, lesser Bomb 546
1 Antidote, lesser Elixir 546
1 Antiplague, lesser Elixir 546
1 Bestial mutagen, lesser Elixir 546
Level Item Category Page
1 Cheetah’s elixir, lesser Elixir 547
1 Cognitive mutagen, lesser Elixir 547
1 Eagle-eye elixir, lesser Elixir 548
1 Elixir of life, lesser Elixir 548
1 Juggernaut mutagen, lesser Elixir 548
1 Leaper’s elixir, lesser Elixir 549
1 Quicksilver mutagen, lesser Elixir 549
1 Serene mutagen, lesser Elixir 549
1 Silvertongue mutagen, lesser Elixir 550
1 Arsenic Poison 550
1 Giant centipede venom Poison 551
1 Smokestick, lesser Tool 554
1 Snake oil Tool 554
1 Sunrod Tool 554
1 Tindertwig Tool 554
2 Bravo’s brew, lesser Elixir 547
2 Cat’s eye elixir Elixir 547
2 Comprehension elixir, lesser Elixir 547
2 Darkvision elixir, lesser Elixir 547
2 Infiltrator’s elixir Elixir 548
2 Belladonna Poison 551
2 Black adder venom Poison 551
2 Lethargy poison Poison 552
2 Silversheen Tool 554
3 Acid flask, moderate Bomb 544
3 Alchemist’s fire, moderate Bomb 545
3 Bottled lightning, moderate Bomb 545
3 Frost vial, moderate Bomb 545
3 Tanglefoot bag, moderate Bomb 545
3 Thunderstone, moderate Bomb 546
3 Bestial mutagen, moderate Elixir 546
3 Cognitive mutagen, moderate Elixir 547
3 Juggernaut mutagen, moderate Elixir 548
3 Quicksilver mutagen, moderateElixir 549
3 Serene mutagen, moderate Elixir 549
3 Silvertongue mutagen, moderateElixir 550
3 Cytillesh oil Poison 551
3 Graveroot Poison 552
4 Bomber’s eye elixir, lesser Elixir 547
4 Darkvision elixir, moderate Elixir 547
4 Mistform elixir, lesser Elixir 549
4 Salamander elixir, lesser Elixir 549
4 Stone fist elixir Elixir 550
4 Winter wolf elixir, lesser Elixir 550
5 Cheetah’s elixir, moderate Elixir 547
5 Eagle-eye elixir, moderate Elixir 548
5 Elixir of life, lesser Elixir 548
5 Sea touch elixir, lesser Elixir 549
5 Hunting spider venom Poison 552
6 Antidote, moderate Elixir 546
6 Antiplague, moderate Elixir 546
6 Mistform elixir, moderate Elixir 549
6 Giant scorpion venom Poison 551
7 Comprehension elixir, greater Elixir 547
7 Leaper’s elixir, greater Elixir 549
543
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Level Item Category Page
7 Giant wasp venom Poison 552
7 Malyass root paste Poison 552
7 Smokestick, greater Tool 554
8 Darkvision elixir, greater Elixir 547
8 Nettleweed residue Poison 553
8 Wyvern poison Poison 554
9 Cheetah’s elixir, greater Elixir 547
9 Elixir of life, moderate Elixir 548
9 Lich dust Poison 552
9 Spider root Poison 553
10 Antidote, greater Elixir 546
10 Antiplague, greater Elixir 546
10 Bravo’s brew, moderate Elixir 547
10 Eagle-eye elixir, greater Elixir 548
10 Mistform elixir, greater Elixir 549
10 Shadow essence Poison 553
10 Wolfsbane Poison 553
11 Acid flask, greater Bomb 544
11 Alchemist’s fire, greater Bomb 545
11 Bottled lightning, greater Bomb 545
11 Frost vial, greater Bomb 545
11 Tanglefoot bag, greater Bomb 545
11 Thunderstone, greater Bomb 546
11 Bestial mutagen, greater Elixir 546
11 Cognitive mutagen, greater Elixir 547
11 Juggernaut mutagen, greater Elixir 548
11 Quicksilver mutagen, greater Elixir 549
11 Serene mutagen, greater Elixir 549
11 Silvertongue mutagen, greater Elixir 550
11 Blightburn resin Poison 551
12 Salamander elixir, greater Elixir 549
12 Sea touch elixir, moderate Elixir 549
12 Winter wolf elixir, moderate Elixir 550
12 Slumber wine Poison 553
13 Elixir of life, greater Elixir 548
13 Deathcap powder Poison 551
13 Purple worm venom Poison 553
14 Antidote, major Elixir 546
14 Antiplague, major Elixir 546
14 Bomber’s eye elixir, greater Elixir 547
15 Bravo’s brew, greater Elixir 547
15 Elixir of life, greater Elixir 548
15 Sea touch elixir, greater Elixir 549
15 Dragon bile Poison 551
15 Mindfog mist Poison 553
16 Eagle-eye elixir, major Elixir 548
16 Salamander elixir, greater Elixir 549
16 Winter wolf elixir, greater Elixir 550
16 Brimstone fumes Poison 551
16 Nightmare vapor Poison 553
17 Acid flask, major Bomb 544
17 Alchemist’s fire, major Bomb 545
17 Bottled lightning, major Bomb 545
17 Frost vial, major Bomb 545
17 Tanglefoot bag, major Bomb 545
Level Item Category Page
17 Thunderstone, major Bomb 546
17 Bestial mutagen, major Elixir 546
17 Cognitive mutagen, major Elixir 547
17 Juggernaut mutagen, major Elixir 548
17 Quicksilver mutagen, major Elixir 549
17 Serene mutagen, major Elixir 549
17 Silvertongue mutagen, major Elixir 550
17 Hemlock Poison 552
18 King’s sleep Poison 552
19 Elixir of life, true Elixir 548
19 Black lotus extract Poison 551
20 Elixir of rejuvenation Elixir 548
20 Tears of death Poison 553
20 Philosopher’s stone Tool 554
Alchemical Bombs
An alchemical bomb combines volatile alchemical
components that explode when the bomb hits a creature
or object. Most alchemical bombs deal damage, though
some produce other effects. Bombs have the bomb trait.
Bombs are martial thrown weapons with a range
increment of 20 feet. When you throw a bomb, you
make a weapon attack roll against the target’s AC, as
you would for any other weapon. It takes one hand to
draw, prepare, and throw a bomb. Due to the complexity
involved in preparing bombs, Strikes to throw alchemical
bombs gain the manipulate trait. The bomb is activated
when thrown as a Strike—you don’t have to activate
it separately.
Splash Trait
Most bombs also have the splash trait. When you use a
thrown weapon with the splash trait, you don’t add your
Strength modifier to the damage roll. If an attack with a
splash weapon fails, succeeds, or critically succeeds, all
creatures within 5 feet of the target (including the target)
take the listed splash damage. On a failure (but not a critical
failure), the target of the attack still takes the splash damage.
Add splash damage together with the initial damage against
the target before applying the target’s resistance or weakness.
You don’t multiply splash damage on a critical hit.
For example, if you threw a lesser acid flask and hit
your target, that creature would take 1d6 persistent acid
damage and 1 acid splash damage. All other creatures
within 5 feet of it would take 1 acid splash damage. On
a critical hit, the target would take 2d6 persistent acid
damage, but the splash damage would still be 1. If you
missed, the target would take 1 splash damage. If you
critically failed, no one would take any damage.
ACID FLASK ITEM 1+
ACID ALCHEMICAL BOMB CONSUMABLE SPLASH
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Strike
This flask filled with corrosive acid deals 1 acid damage, the
Core Rulebook
544
listed persistent acid damage, and the listed acid splash
damage. Many types grant an item bonus to attack rolls.
Type lesser; Level 1; Price 3 gp
It deals 1d6 persistent acid damage and 1 acid splash damage.
Type moderate; Level 3; Price 10 gp
You gain a +1 item bonus to attack rolls. The bomb deals
2d6 persistent acid damage and 2 acid splash damage.
Type greater; Level 11; Price 250 gp
You gain a +2 item bonus to attack rolls. The bomb deals
3d6 persistent acid damage and 3 acid splash damage.
Type major; Level 17; Price 2,500 gp
You gain a +3 item bonus to attack rolls. The bomb deals
4d6 persistent acid damage and 4 acid splash damage.
ALCHEMIST’S FIRE ITEM 1+
ALCHEMICAL BOMB CONSUMABLE FIRE SPLASH
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Strike
Alchemist’s fire is a combination of volatile liquids that ignite
when exposed to air. Alchemist’s fire deals the listed fire
damage, persistent fire damage, and splash damage. Many
types grant an item bonus to attack rolls.
Type lesser; Level 1; Price 3 gp
The bomb deals 1d8 fire damage, 1 persistent fire damage, and
1 fire splash damage.
Type moderate; Level 3; Price 10 gp
You gain a +1 item bonus to attack rolls. The bomb deals
2d8 fire damage, 2 persistent fire damage, and 2 fire
splash damage.
Type greater; Level 11; Price 250 gp
You gain a +2 item bonus to attack rolls. The bomb
deals 3d8 fire damage, 3 persistent fire damage, and
3 fire splash damage.
Type major; Level 17; Price 2,500 gp
You gain a +3 item bonus to attack rolls. The bomb
deals 4d8 fire damage, 4 persistent fire damage, and 4
fire splash damage.
BOTTLED LIGHTNING ITEM 1+
ALCHEMICAL BOMB CONSUMABLE ELECTRICITY SPLASH
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Strike
Bottled lightning is packed with volatile reagents that create
a blast of electricity when they are exposed to air. Bottled
lightning deals the listed electricity damage and electricity
splash damage. On a hit, the target becomes flat-footed until
the start of your next turn. Many types grant an item bonus
to attack rolls.
Type lesser; Level 1; Price 3 gp
It deals 1d6 electricity damage and 1 electricity splash damage.
Type moderate; Level 3; Price 10 gp
You gain a +1 item bonus to attack rolls. The bomb deals 2d6
electricity damage and 2 electricity splash damage.
Type greater; Level 11; Price 250 gp
You gain a +2 item bonus to attack rolls. The bomb deals 3d6
electricity damage and 3 electricity splash damage.
Type major; Level 17; Price 2,500 gp
You gain a +3 item bonus to attack rolls. The bomb deals 4d6
electricity damage and 4 electricity splash damage.
FROST VIAL ITEM 1+
ALCHEMICAL BOMB COLD CONSUMABLE SPLASH
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Strike
The liquid reagents in this vial rapidly absorb heat
when exposed to air. A frost vial deals the listed cold
damage and cold splash damage. On a hit, the target
takes a status penalty to its Speeds until the end of its
next turn. Many types of frost vial also grant an item
bonus to attack rolls.
Type lesser; Level 1; Price 3 gp
The bomb deals 1d6 cold damage and 1 cold splash
damage, and the target takes a –5-foot penalty.
Type moderate; Level 3; Price 10 gp
You gain a +1 item bonus to attack rolls, the bomb deals 2d6
cold damage and 2 cold splash damage, and the target takes
a –10-foot penalty.
Type greater; Level 11; Price 250 gp
You gain a +2 item bonus to attack rolls, the bomb deals 3d6
cold damage and 3 cold splash damage, and the target takes
a –10-foot penalty.
Type major; Level 17; Price 2,500 gp
You gain a +3 item bonus to attack rolls, the bomb deals 4d6
cold damage and 4 cold splash damage, and the target
takes a –15-foot penalty.
TANGLEFOOT BAG ITEM 1+
ALCHEMICAL BOMB CONSUMABLE
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Strike
A tanglefoot bag is filled with sticky substances.
When you hit a creature with a tanglefoot bag, that
creature takes a status penalty to its Speeds for 1 minute.
Many types of tanglefoot bag also grant an item bonus on
attack rolls.
On a critical hit, a creature in contact with a solid surface
becomes stuck to the surface and immobilized for 1 round,
and a creature flying via wings has its wings tangled, causing
it to fall safely to the ground and become unable to Fly again
for 1 round. Tanglefoot bags are not effective when used on a
creature that is in water.
The target can end any effects by Escaping or spending
a total of 3 Interact actions to carefully remove the
sticky substances. These Interact actions don’t have to be
consecutive, and other creatures can provide the actions
as well.
Type lesser; Level 1; Price 3 gp
The target takes a –10-foot penalty, and the Escape DC is 17.
Type moderate; Level 3; Price 10 gp
You gain a +1 item bonus to attack rolls, the target takes a
–15-foot penalty, and the Escape DC is 19.
Type greater; Level 11; Price 250 gp
545
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
You gain a +2 item bonus to attack rolls, the target takes a
–15-foot penalty, and the Escape DC is 28.
Type major; Level 17; Price 2,500 gp
You gain a +3 item bonus to attack rolls, the target takes a
–20-foot penalty, and the Escape DC is 37.
THUNDERSTONE ITEM 1+
ALCHEMICAL BOMB CONSUMABLE SONIC SPLASH
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Strike
When this stone hits a creature or a hard surface, it
explodes with a deafening bang. A thunderstone deals
the listed sonic damage and sonic splash damage, and
each creature within 10 feet of the space in which the
stone exploded must succeed at a Fortitude saving throw
with the listed DC or be deafened until the end of its
next turn. Many types of thunderstone grant an item
bonus to attack rolls.
Type lesser; Level 1; Price 3 gp
The bomb deals 1d4 sonic damage and 1 sonic
splash damage, and the DC is 17.
Type moderate; Level 3; Price 10 gp
You gain a +1 item bonus to attack rolls. The bomb deals
2d4 sonic damage and 2 sonic splash damage, and the DC is 20.
Type greater; Level 11; Price 250 gp
You gain a +2 item bonus to attack rolls. The bomb deals 3d4
sonic damage and 3 sonic splash damage, and the DC is 28.
Type major; Level 17; Price 2,500 gp
You gain a +3 item bonus to attack rolls. The bomb deals 4d4
sonic damage and 4 sonic splash damage, and the DC is 36.
Alchemical Elixirs
Elixirs are alchemical liquids that are used by drinking
them. They have the elixir trait. These potent concoctions
grant the drinker some alchemical benefits. While all
elixirs follow the same general rules, mutagens (described
below) have additional rules that apply to their use.
Activating Elixirs
You usually Interact to activate an elixir as you drink it
or feed it to another creature. You can feed an elixir only
to a creature within reach that is either willing or unable
to prevent you from doing so. You usually need only one
hand to consume an elixir or feed it to another creature.
Mutagens
These elixirs, indicated by the mutagen trait, temporarily
transmogrify the subject’s body and alter its mind. Typically,
only alchemists have the expertise to craft mutagens, and
some say they are the only ones reckless enough to use them.
A mutagen always conveys one or more beneficial
effects (listed in the Benefit entry) paired with one or
more detrimental effects (shown in the Drawback entry).
Mutagens are polymorph effects, meaning you can
benefit from only one at a time (see page 301 for more
information about the polymorph trait).
ANTIDOTE ITEM 1+
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE ELIXIR
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
An antidote protects you against toxins. Upon drinking an
antidote, you gain an item bonus to Fortitude saving throws
against poisons for 6 hours.
Type lesser; Level 1; Price 3 gp
You gain a +2 item bonus.
Type moderate; Level 6; Price 35 gp
You gain a +3 item bonus.
Type greater; Level 10; Price 160 gp
You gain a +4 item bonus.
Type major; Level 14; Price 675 gp
You gain a +4 item bonus, and when you drink the
antidote, you can immediately attempt a saving throw
against one poison of 14th level or lower affecting
you. If you succeed, the poison is neutralized.
ANTIPLAGUE ITEM 1+
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE ELIXIR
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activation [one-action] Interact
Antiplague can fortify the body’s defenses against diseases.
Upon drinking an antiplague, you gain an item bonus to
Fortitude saving throws against diseases for 24 hours; this
applies to your daily save against a disease’s progression.
Type lesser; Level 1; Price 3 gp
You gain a +2 item bonus.
Type moderate; Level 6; Price 35 gp
You gain a +3 item bonus.
Type greater; Level 10; Price 160 gp
You gain a +4 item bonus.
Type major; Level 14; Price 675 gp
You gain a +4 item bonus, and when you drink the antiplague,
you can immediately attempt a saving throw against one
disease of 14th level or lower affecting you. If you succeed,
you are cured of the disease.
BESTIAL MUTAGEN ITEM 1+
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE ELIXIR MUTAGEN POLYMORPH
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Your features transform into something bestial and you take
on muscle mass, but your lumbering form is clumsy.
Benefit You gain an item bonus to Athletics checks and
unarmed attack rolls. You gain a claw unarmed attack with
the agile trait and a jaws unarmed attack.
Drawback You take a –1 penalty to AC and a –2 penalty to
Reflex saves.
Type lesser; Level 1; Price 4 gp
You gain a +1 item bonus, your claw deals 1d4 slashing damage,
your jaws deal 1d6 piercing damage, and the duration is 1 minute.
Type moderate; Level 3; Price 12 gp
You gain a +2 item bonus, your claw deals 1d6 slashing damage,
your jaws deal 1d8 piercing damage, and the duration is 10 minutes.
Core Rulebook
546
Type greater; Level 11; Price 300 gp
You gain a +3 item bonus, your claw deals 1d8 slashing damage,
your jaws deal 1d10 piercing damage, and the duration is 1 hour.
Type major; Level 17; Price 3,000 gp
You gain a +4 item bonus, your claw deals 1d8 slashing damage,
your jaws deal 1d10 piercing damage, and the duration is 1
hour. You gain weapon specialization with the claws and jaws,
or greater weapon specialization, if you already have weapon
specialization with these unarmed attacks.
BOMBER’S EYE ELIXIR ITEM 4+
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE ELIXIR
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
This tincture lets you pinpoint your foes. For the next
5 minutes, your alchemical bomb Strikes reduce the
circumstance bonus to AC your targets gain from
cover.
Type lesser; Level 4; Price 14 gp
Reduce your targets’ circumstance bonus by 1.
Type greater; Level 14; Price 700 gp
Reduce your targets’ circumstance bonus by 2.
BRAVO’S BREW ITEM 2+
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE ELIXIR MENTAL
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
This flask of foaming beer grants courage. For the next hour
after drinking this elixir, you gain an item bonus to Will saves,
which is greater when attempting Will saves against fear.
Type lesser; Level 2; Price 7 gp
The bonus on Will saves is +1, or +2 against fear.
Type moderate; Level 10; Price 150 gp
The bonus on Will saves is +2, or +3 against fear.
Type greater; Level 15; Price 700 gp
The bonus on Will saves is +3, or +4 against fear. If you
roll a success on a save against fear, you get a critical
success instead.
CAT’S EYE ELIXIR ITEM 2
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE ELIXIR
Price 7 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
After you consume this elixir, your vision sharpens and you
become sensitive to even the most minute movements. For
the next minute, you reduce the flat check to target hidden
creatures to 5, and you don’t need to attempt a flat check to
target concealed creatures. These benefits apply only against
creatures within 30 feet of you.
CHEETAH’S ELIXIR ITEM 1+
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE ELIXIR
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Enzymatic compounds in this elixir strengthen and excite the
muscles in your legs. You gain a status bonus to your Speed
for the listed duration.
Type lesser; Level 1; Price 3 gp
The bonus is +5 feet, and the duration is 1 minute.
Type moderate; Level 5; Price 25 gp
The bonus is +10 feet, and the duration is 10 minutes.
Type greater; Level 9; Price 110 gp
The bonus is +10 feet, and the duration is 1 hour.
COGNITIVE MUTAGEN ITEM 1+
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE ELIXIR MUTAGEN POLYMORPH
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Your mind becomes clear and cognition flows freely,
but physical matters seem ephemeral.
Benefit You gain an item bonus to Arcana,
Crafting, Lore, Occultism, and Society checks
and all checks to Recall Knowledge. Your critical
failures on Recall Knowledge checks become
failures instead.
Drawback You take a –2 penalty to weapon and
unarmed attack rolls, Athletics checks, and Acrobatics
checks. You can carry 2 less Bulk than normal before
becoming encumbered, and the maximum Bulk you can carry
is reduced by 4.
Type lesser; Level 1; Price 4 gp
The bonus is +1, and the duration is 1 minute.
Type moderate; Level 3; Price 12 gp
The bonus is +2, and the duration is 10 minutes.
Type greater; Level 11; Price 300 gp
The bonus is +3, and the duration is 1 hour. You become trained
in one Intelligence-based skill, chosen at creation.
Type major; Level 17; Price 3,000 gp
The bonus is +4, and the duration is 1 hour. You become
trained in one skill, chosen at creation.
COMPREHENSION ELIXIR ITEM 2+
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE ELIXIR MENTAL
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
This bitter draught opens your mind to the potential of the
written word. For the listed duration after drinking this
elixir, you can understand any words you read, so long as
they are written in a common language. This elixir doesn’t
automatically allow you to understand codes or extremely
esoteric passages—you still need to attempt a skill check to
Decipher Writing.
Type lesser; Level 2; Price 7 gp
The duration is 1 minute.
Type greater; Level 7; Price 54 gp
The duration is 10 minutes.
DARKVISION ELIXIR ITEM 2+
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE ELIXIR
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
547
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
After you drink this elixir, your sight becomes sharper in
darkness. You gain darkvision for the listed duration.
Type lesser; Level 2; Price 6 gp
The duration is 10 minutes.
Type moderate; Level 4; Price 11 gp
The duration is 1 hour.
Type greater; Level 8; Price 90 gp
The duration is 24 hours.
EAGLE-EYE ELIXIR ITEM 1+
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE ELIXIR
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
After you drink this elixir, you notice subtle
visual details. For the next hour, you gain an item
bonus to Perception checks that is greater when
attempting to find secret doors and traps.
Type lesser; Level 1; Price 4 gp
The bonus is +1, or +2 to find secret doors and traps.
Type moderate; Level 5; Price 27 gp
The bonus is +2, or +3 to find secret doors and traps.
Type greater; Level 10; Price 200 gp
The bonus is +3, or +4 to find secret doors and traps.
Type major; Level 16; Price 2,000 gp
The bonus is +3, or +4 to find secret doors and traps. Each
time you pass within 10 feet of a secret door or trap, the GM
automatically rolls a secret check for you to find it.
ELIXIR OF LIFE ITEM 1+
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE ELIXIR HEALING
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Elixirs of life accelerate the body’s natural healing processes
and immune system. Upon drinking this elixir, you regain the
listed number of Hit Points and gain an item bonus to saving
throws against diseases and poisons for 10 minutes.
Type minor; Level 1; Price 3 gp
The elixir restores 1d6 Hit Points, and the bonus is +1.
Type lesser; Level 5; Price 30 gp
The elixir restores 3d6+6 Hit Points and the bonus is +1.
Type moderate; Level 9; Price 150 gp
The elixir restores 5d6+12 Hit Points, and the bonus is +2.
Type greater; Level 13; Price 600 gp
The elixir restores 7d6+18 Hit Points, and the bonus is +2.
Type major; Level 15; Price 1,300 gp
The elixir restores 8d6+21 Hit Points, and the bonus is +3.
Type true; Level 19; Price 3,000 gp
The elixir restores 10d6+27 Hit Points, and the bonus is +4.
ELIXIR OF REJUVENATION ITEM 20
UNCOMMON ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE ELIXIR
Price —
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
The elixir of rejuvenation restores a creature to full health
and eradicates toxins affecting it. When you drink this elixir,
you’re restored to your maximum Hit Points, and all afflictions
of 20th level or lower affecting you are removed.
You can instead administer this elixir to a creature that
has been dead for a week or less. When you do, that creature
is instantly brought back to life with 1 Hit Point and no spell
slots, Focus Points, or other daily resources.
Craft Requirements philosopher’s stone, true elixir of life
INFILTRATOR’S ELIXIR ITEM 2
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE ELIXIR POLYMORPH
Price 6 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Favored by spies and tricksters, an infiltrator’s
elixir is used to alter your appearance. When
imbibed, you take the shape of a humanoid
creature of your size, but different enough so you
might be unrecognizable. If you aren’t a humanoid,
you might take on a form more similar to your own, at
the GM’s discretion.
The creator of the elixir decides the basics of the appearance
you transform into when you imbibe the elixir, including eye
color, skin tone, and hair color. The elixir can’t change your
form into that of a specific person. After the form takes hold,
you retain it for the next 10 minutes.
Drinking this elixir counts as setting up a disguise to
Impersonate. You gain a +4 status bonus to your Deception
DC to avoid others seeing through your disguise, and you add
your level to this DC even if untrained.
JUGGERNAUT MUTAGEN ITEM 1+
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE ELIXIR MUTAGEN POLYMORPH
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
After you drink this mutagen, your body becomes thick and
sturdy. You exhibit a healthy glow, though you tend to be
ponderous and unobservant.
Benefit You gain an item bonus to Fortitude saves and the
listed number of temporary Hit Points. Whenever you are at
maximum Hit Points for at least 1 full minute, you regain the
temporary Hit Points.
Drawback You take a –2 penalty to Will saves, Perception
checks, and initiative rolls.
Type lesser; Level 1; Price 4 gp
The bonus is +1, you gain 5 temporary Hit Points, and the
duration is 1 minute.
Type moderate; Level 3; Price 12 gp
The bonus is +2, you gain 10 temporary Hit Points, and the
duration is 10 minutes.
Type greater; Level 11; Price 300 gp
The bonus is +3, you gain 30 temporary Hit Points, and the
duration is 1 hour. When you roll a success on a Fortitude
save, you get a critical success instead.
Type major; Level 17; Price 3,000 gp
The bonus is +4, you gain 45 temporary Hit Points, and the
duration is 1 hour. When you roll a success on a Fortitude save,
Core Rulebook
548
you get a critical success instead, and your critical failures on
Fortitude saves become failures instead.
LEAPER’S ELIXIR ITEM 1+
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE ELIXIR
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
This tingly solution increases the elasticity and
contraction of your leg muscles. For 1 minute after
drinking this elixir, you can High Jump or Long Jump
as a single action instead of 2 actions. If you do, you
don’t perform the initial Stride (nor do you fail if you
don’t Stride 10 feet).
Type lesser; Level 1; Price 3 gp
Type greater; Level 7; Price 55 gp
The maximum vertical distance you can jump with a
High Jump is the same as you can jump horizontally
with a Long Jump.
MISTFORM ELIXIR ITEM 4+
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE ELIXIR ILLUSION VISUAL
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
A faint mist emanates from your skin, making you concealed
for the listed duration. As usual being concealed when your
position is still obvious, you can’t use this concealment to Hide
or Sneak.
Type lesser; Level 4; Price 18 gp
The duration is 3 rounds.
Type moderate; Level 6; Price 56 gp
The duration is 1 minute.
Type greater; Level 10; Price 180 gp
The duration is 5 minutes.
QUICKSILVER MUTAGEN ITEM 1+
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE ELIXIR MUTAGEN POLYMORPH
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Your features become thin and angular. You become swifter
and nimbler, but your body also becomes fragile.
Benefit You gain an item bonus to Acrobatics checks, Stealth
checks, Thievery checks, Reflex saves, and ranged attack rolls,
and you gain the listed status bonus to your Speed.
Drawback You take damage equal to twice your level; you
can’t recover Hit Points lost in this way by any means while
the mutagen lasts. You take a –2 penalty to Fortitude saves.
Type lesser; Level 1; Price 4 gp
The bonus to rolls is +1, the bonus to Speed is +5 feet, and the
duration is 1 minute.
Type moderate; Level 3; Price 12 gp
The bonus to rolls is +2, the bonus to Speed is +10 feet, and
the duration is 10 minutes.
Type greater; Level 11; Price 300 gp
The bonus to rolls is +3, the bonus to Speed is +15 feet, and
the duration is 1 hour.
Type major; Level 17; Price 3,000 gp
The bonus to rolls is +4, the bonus to Speed is +20 feet, and
the duration is 1 hour.
SALAMANDER ELIXIR ITEM 4+
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE ELIXIR
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
This elixir is made from salamander scales to withstand
fire. For 24 hours, you are protected from the effects
of severe heat.
Type lesser; Level 4; Price 15 gp
Type moderate; Level 12; Price 320 gp
You’re also protected from extreme heat.
Type greater; Level 16; Price 1,400 gp
You’re also protected from extreme and incredible heat.
SEA TOUCH ELIXIR ITEM 5+
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE ELIXIR POLYMORPH
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
This briny concoction alters the skin on your hands and feet.
The spaces between your fingers and toes become webbed,
granting you a swim Speed of 20 feet for the listed duration.
Type lesser; Level 5; Price 22 gp
The duration is 10 minutes.
Type moderate; Level 12; Price 300 gp
The duration is 1 hour, and you can breathe underwater.
Type greater; Level 15; Price 920 gp
The duration is 24 hours, and you can breathe underwater.
SERENE MUTAGEN ITEM 1+
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE ELIXIR MUTAGEN POLYMORPH
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
You gain inner serenity, focused on fine details and steeled
against mental assaults, but you find violence off-putting.
Benefit You gain an item bonus to Will saves and
Perception, Medicine, Nature, Religion, and Survival checks.
This bonus improves when you attempt Will saves against
mental effects.
Drawback You take a –1 penalty to attack rolls and save
DCs of offensive spells, and a –1 penalty per damage die to all
weapon, unarmed attack, and spell damage.
Type lesser; Level 1; Price 4 gp
The bonus is +1, or +2 vs. mental, and the duration is 1 minute.
Type moderate; Level 3; Price 12 gp
The bonus is +2, or +3 vs. mental, and the duration is 10 minutes.
Type greater; Level 11; Price 300 gp
The bonus is +3, or +4 vs. mental, and the duration is 1 hour.
When you roll a success on a Will save against a mental effect,
you get a critical success instead.
Type major; Level 17; Price 3,000 gp
The bonus is +4, and the duration is 1 hour. When you roll
a success on a Will save against a mental effect, you get a
critical success instead, and your critical failures on Will saves
against mental effects become failures instead.
549
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
SILVERTONGUE MUTAGEN ITEM 1+
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE ELIXIR MUTAGEN POLYMORPH
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Your features become striking and your voice becomes
musical and commanding, though facts and figures become
hazy for you and emotion clouds your ability to reason.
Benefit You gain an item bonus to Deception, Diplomacy,
Intimidation, and Performance checks. Your critical failures
with any of these skill become failures instead.
Drawback You take a –2 item penalty to Arcana, Crafting,
Lore, Occultism, and Society checks. Choose one skill in which
you are trained; for the duration, you become untrained in that
skill. All your failures on checks to Recall Knowledge become
critical failures.
Type lesser; Level 1; Price 4 gp
The bonus is +1, and the duration is 1 minute.
Type moderate; Level 3; Price 12 gp
The bonus is +2, and the duration is 10 minutes.
Type greater; Level 11; Price 300 gp
The bonus is +3, and the duration is 1 hour.
Type major; Level 17; Price 3,000 gp
The bonus is +4, and the duration is 1 hour.
STONE FIST ELIXIR ITEM 4
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE ELIXIR MORPH
Price 13 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Your fists become hard as stone. For 1 hour, your fists deal 1d6
bludgeoning damage and lose the nonlethal trait.
WINTER WOLF ELIXIR ITEM 4+
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE ELIXIR
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
This elixir warms your core and improves your circulation. For
24 hours, you are protected from the effects of severe cold.
Type lesser; Level 4; Price 15 gp
Type moderate; Level 12; Price 320 gp
You’re also protected from extreme cold.
Type greater; Level 16; Price 1,400 gp
You’re also protected from extreme and incredible cold.
Alchemical Poisons
Alchemical poisons are potent toxins distilled or extracted
from natural sources and made either stronger or easier to
administer. Each poison’s stat block includes the Price and
features for a single dose. Poison doses are typically kept
in a vial or some other type of safe and secure container.
Applying alchemical poisons uses Interact actions. A
poison typically requires one hand to pour into food
or scatter in the air. Applying a poison to a weapon or
another item requires two hands, with one hand holding
the weapon or item. The Usage entry for a poison
indicates the number of hands needed for a typical means
of application, but the GM might determine that using
poisons in other ways functions differently.
The full rules for how poisons and other afflictions
work begin on page 457. A creature attempts the listed
saving throw as soon as it’s exposed to the poison; on a
failed save, the creature advances to stage 1 of the poison
after any listed onset time elapses.
Some poisons have the virulent trait. This means the
poison is harder to remove once it has taken effect; see
Virulent Afflictions on page 458.
Method of Exposure
Each alchemical poison has one of the following traits,
which define how a creature can be exposed to that poison.
Contact: A contact poison is activated by applying it to
an item or directly onto a living creature’s skin. The first
creature to touch the affected item must attempt a saving
throw against the poison; if the poison is applied directly,
the creature must attempt a saving throw immediately
when the poison touches its skin. Contact poisons are
infeasible to apply to a creature via a weapon attack due to
the logistics of delivering them without poisoning yourself.
Typically, the onset time of a contact poison is 1 minute.
Ingested: An ingested poison is activated by applying
it to food or drink to be consumed by a living creature,
or by placing it directly into a living creature’s mouth. A
creature attempts a saving throw against such a poison
when it consumes the poison or the food or drink treated
with the poison. The onset time of ingested poisons
typically ranges anywhere from 1 minute to 1 day.
Inhaled: An inhaled poison is activated by unleashing
it from its container. Once unleashed, the poison creates a
cloud filling a 10-foot cube lasting for 1 minute or until a
strong wind dissipates the cloud. Every creature entering
this cloud is exposed to the poison and must attempt a
saving throw against it; a creature aware of the poison
before entering the cloud can use a single action to hold
its breath and gain a +2 circumstance bonus to the saving
throw for 1 round.
Injury: An injury poison is activated by applying it to
a weapon, and it affects the target of the first Strike made
using the poisoned weapon. If that Strike is a success and
deals piercing or slashing damage, the target must attempt
a saving throw against the poison. On a failed Strike, the
target is unaffected, but the poison remains on the weapon
and you can try again. On a critical failure, or if the Strike
fails to deal slashing or piercing damage for some other
reason, the poison is spent but the target is unaffected.
ARSENIC ITEM 1
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE INGESTED POISON
Price 3 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
This toxin is a compound of arsenic and other substances. You
can’t reduce your sickened condition while affected.
Core Rulebook
550
Saving Throw DC 18 Fortitude; Onset 10 minutes; Maximum
Duration 5 minutes; Stage 1 1d4 poison damage and sickened
1 (1  minute); Stage 2 1d6 poison damage and sickened 2 (1
minute); Stage 3 2d6 poison damage and sickened 3 (1 minute)
BELLADONNA ITEM 2
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE INGESTED POISON
Price 5 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Sometimes called “deadly nightshade,” belladonna is a widely
available toxin produced from a plant similar to a tomato.
Saving Throw DC 19 Fortitude; Onset 10 minutes; Maximum
Duration 30 minutes; Stage 1 dazzled (10 minutes); Stage 2
1d6 poison damage and sickened 1 (10 minutes); Stage 3 1d6
poison damage, confused, and sickened 1 (1 minute)
BLACK ADDER VENOM ITEM 2
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE INJURY POISON
Price 6 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate[three-actions] Interact
Adder venom is a simple but effective way to enhance a weapon.
Saving Throw DC 18 Fortitude; Maximum Duration 3
rounds; Stage 1 1d8 poison damage (1 round); Stage 2 1d10
poison damage (1 round); Stage 3 2d6 poison damage (1 round)
BLACK LOTUS EXTRACT ITEM 19
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE CONTACT POISON VIRULENT
Price 6,500 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Black lotus extract causes severe internal bleeding.
Saving Throw DC 42 Fortitude; Onset 1 minute; Maximum
Duration 6 rounds; Stage 1 15d6 poison damage and drained 1
(1 round); Stage 2 17d6 poison damage and drained 1 (1 round);
Stage 3 20d6 poison damage and drained 2 (1 round)
BLIGHTBURN RESIN ITEM 11
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE CONTACT POISON
Price 225 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
This tacky, hardened sap is harvested from trees infected by
fungal blights and exposed to open flames.
Saving Throw DC 31 Fortitude; Onset 1 minute; Maximum
Duration 6 rounds; Stage 1 8d6 poison damage (1  round);
Stage 2 10d6 poison damage (1 round); Stage 3 15d6 poison
damage (1 round)
BRIMSTONE FUMES ITEM 16
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE EVIL INHALED POISON
Price 1,500 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Fumes from the forges of Hell drain health and strength alike.
Saving Throw DC 36 Fortitude; Onset 1 round; Maximum
Duration 6 rounds; Stage 1 7d6 poison damage and enfeebled
1 (1  round); Stage 2 8d6 poison damage and enfeebled 2
(1  round); Stage 3 10d6 poison damage and enfeebled 3
(1 round)
CYTILLESH OIL ITEM 3
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE INJURY POISON
Price 10 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
This thick substance is distilled from the mind-robbing
cytillesh fungus, though it lacks memory-altering capabilities.
Saving Throw DC 19 Fortitude; Maximum Duration 4
rounds; Stage 1 1d10 poison damage (1 round); Stage 2
1d12 poison damage (1 round); Stage 3 2d10 poison damage
(1 round)
DEATHCAP POWDER ITEM 13
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE INGESTED POISON
Price 450 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
The toxic deathcap mushroom can be dried, ground, and
treated to form a flavorless powder with accelerated effects.
Saving Throw DC 33 Fortitude; Onset 10 minutes; Maximum
Duration 6 minutes; Stage 1 13d6 poison damage (1 minute);
Stage 2 17d6 poison damage and sickened 2 (1 minute);
Stage 3 20d6 poison damage and sickened 3 (1 minute)
DRAGON BILE ITEM 15
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE CONTACT POISON
Price 925 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
A mix of digestive juices and green dragon poison glands
nauseates the victim as its flesh is digested from within.
Saving Throw DC 37 Fortitude; Onset 1 minute; Maximum
Duration 6 rounds; Stage 1 6d6 poison damage and sickened
2 (1 round); Stage 2 7d6 poison damage and sickened 3 (1
round); Stage 3 9d6 poison damage and sickened 4 (1 round)
GIANT CENTIPEDE VENOM ITEM 1
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE INJURY POISON
Price 4 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate [three-actions] Interact
Giant centipede venom causes severe muscle stiffness.
Saving Throw DC 17 Fortitude; Maximum Duration 6
rounds; Stage 1 1d6 poison damage (1 round); Stage 2 1d8
poison damage and flat-footed (1 round); Stage 3 1d12 poison
damage, clumsy 1, and flat-footed (1 round)
GIANT SCORPION VENOM ITEM 6
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE INJURY POISON
Price 40 gp
551
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate[three-actions] Interact
Scorpion venom is excruciating and its effects are somewhat
debilitating.
Saving Throw DC 22 Fortitude; Maximum Duration 6
rounds; Stage 1 1d10 poison damage and enfeebled 1 (1 round);
Stage 2 2d10 poison damage and enfeebled 1 (1 round); Stage
3 2d10 poison damage and enfeebled 2 (1 round)
GIANT WASP VENOM ITEM 7
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE INJURY POISON
Price 55 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate [three-actions] Interact
Giant wasp venom interferes with a victim’s movement.
Saving Throw DC 25 Fortitude; Maximum Duration 6
rounds; Stage 1 2d6 poison damage and clumsy 1 (1 round);
Stage 2 3d6 poison damage and clumsy 2 (1 round); Stage 3
4d6 poison and clumsy 2 (1 round)
GRAVEROOT ITEM 3
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE INJURY POISON
Price 10 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate[three-actions] Interact
The opaque white sap from the graveroot shrub clouds
the mind.
Saving Throw DC 19 Fortitude; Maximum Duration 4
rounds; Stage 1 1d10 poison damage (1 round); Stage 2 1d12
poison damage and stupefied 1 (1 round); Stage 3 2d6 poison
damage and stupefied 2 (1 round)
HEMLOCK ITEM 17
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE INGESTED POISON
Price 2,250 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Concentrated hemlock is a particularly deadly toxin that halts
muscle action—including that of the victim’s heart.
Saving Throw DC 40 Fortitude; Onset 30 minutes;
Maximum Duration 60 minutes; Stage 1 17d6 poison damage
and enfeebled 2 (10 minutes); Stage 2 21d6 poison damage
and enfeebled 3 (10 minutes); Stage 3 26d6 poison damage
and enfeebled 4 (10 minutes)
HUNTING SPIDER VENOM ITEM 5
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE INJURY POISON
Price 25 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate[three-actions] Interact
This venom erodes its target’s defenses, aiding the spider in
securing prey.
Saving Throw DC 21 Fortitude; Maximum Duration 6 rounds;
Stage 1 1d10 poison damage and flat-footed (1 round); Stage 2
1d12 poison damage, clumsy 1, and flat-footed (1 round); Stage 3
2d6 poison damage, clumsy 2, and flat-footed (1 round)
KING’S SLEEP ITEM 18
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE INGESTED POISON VIRULENT
Price 4,000 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
King’s sleep is an insidious long-term poison that can seem
like a disease or even death from natural causes on a
venerable target. The drained condition from king’s sleep is
cumulative with each failed save and can’t be removed while
the poison lasts.
Saving Throw DC 41 Fortitude; Onset 1 day; Stage 1 drained
1 (1 day); Stage 2 drained 1 (1 day); Stage 3 drained 2 (1 day)
LETHARGY POISON ITEM 2
UNCOMMON ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE INCAPACITATION INJURY POISON
SLEEP
Price 7 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate[three-actions] Interact
Lethargy poison is commonly used in hit-and-run tactics
by drow and others who want their victims alive; the
ambusher retreats until the poison sets in and the victim
falls unconscious. Further exposure to lethargy poison does
not require the target to attempt additional saving throws;
only failing an saving throw against an ongoing exposure can
progress its stage.
Saving Throw DC 18 Fortitude; Maximum Duration 4 hours;
Stage 1 slowed 1 (1 round); Stage 2 slowed 1 (1 minute); Stage
3 unconscious with no Perception check to wake up (1 round)
Stage 4 unconscious with no Perception check to wake up
(1d4 hours).
LICH DUST ITEM 9
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE INGESTED POISON
Price 110 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Dust salvaged from the remains of a destroyed lich has
paralytic properties that make it a valuable poison.
Saving Throw DC 28 Fortitude; Onset 10 minutes; Maximum
Duration 6 minutes; Stage 1 fatigued (1 minute); Stage 2 5d6
poison damage and fatigued (1 minute); Stage 3 5d6 poison
damage, fatigued, and paralyzed (1 minute)
MALYASS ROOT PASTE ITEM 7
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE CONTACT POISON
Price 55 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate[three-actions] Interact
Malyass root paste sees use to impede opponents in athletic
competitions, in addition to espionage and tracking.
Saving Throw DC 26 Fortitude; Onset 1 minute; Maximum
Duration 6 minutes; Stage 1 clumsy 1 and –10-foot status
penalty to all Speeds (1 minute); Stage 2 clumsy 2 and –20-foot
status penalty to all Speeds (1 minute); Stage 3 clumsy 3,
flat-footed, and –30-foot status penalty to all Speeds
Core Rulebook
552
MINDFOG MIST ITEM 15
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE INHALED POISON
Price 1,000 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Mindfog mist can be used to undermine spellcasters, as its
effect on a victim’s mental faculties are swift and powerful.
Saving Throw DC 35 Fortitude; Onset 1 round; Maximum
Duration 6 rounds; Stage 1 stupefied 2 (1 round); Stage 2
confused and stupefied 3 (1 round); Stage 3 confused and
stupefied 4 (1 round)
NETTLEWEED RESIDUE ITEM 8
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE CONTACT POISON
Price 75 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Concentrated sap of stinging weeds makes an effective toxin.
Saving Throw DC 27 Fortitude; Onset 1 minute; Maximum
Duration 6 minutes; Stage 1 8d6 poison damage (1  minute);
Stage 2 10d6 poison damage (1 minute); Stage 3 13d6 poison
damage (1 minute)
NIGHTMARE VAPOR ITEM 16
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE INHALED POISON
Price 1,400 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Purportedly sourced from any number of outlandish locales,
nightmare vapor is most often created by boiling the sweat
collected from humanoids caught in the throes of terrible
nightmares.
Saving Throw DC 36 Fortitude; Onset 1 round; Maximum
Duration 6 rounds; Stage 1 confused (1 round); Stage 2
confused and flat-footed (1 round); Stage 3 confused, flatfooted, and stupefied 2 (1 round)
PURPLE WORM VENOM ITEM 13
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE INJURY POISON
Price 500 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate[three-actions] Interact
Venom from enormous purple worms leaves a victim weakened.
Saving Throw DC 32 Fortitude; Maximum Duration 6
rounds; Stage 1 5d6 poison damage and enfeebled 2 (1 round);
Stage 2 6d6 poison damage and enfeebled 2 (1 round); Stage 3
8d6 poison and enfeebled 2 (1 round)
SHADOW ESSENCE ITEM 10
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE INJURY NEGATIVE POISON
Price 160 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate[three-actions] Interact
Distilled from the Plane of Shadow, this oily substance
imposes tenebrous effects. The enfeebled condition from
shadow essence lasts for 24 hours.
Saving Throw DC 29 Fortitude; Maximum Duration 6
rounds; Stage 1 3d6 negative damage and 2d6 poison damage
(1 round); Stage 2 3d6 negative damage, 2d6 poison damage,
and enfeebled 1 (1 round); Stage 3 3d6 negative damage, 2d6
poison damage, and enfeebled 2 (1 round)
SLUMBER WINE ITEM 12
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE INGESTED POISON SLEEP
Price 325 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Slumber wine sees its greatest use in games of intrigue,
where an absence can be more devastating than injury.
Characters unconscious from slumber wine can’t wake up by
any means while the poison lasts, don’t need to eat or drink
while unconscious in this way, and appear to be recently dead
unless an examiner succeeds at a DC 40 Medicine check.
Saving Throw DC 32 Fortitude; Onset 1 hour; Maximum
Duration 7 days; Stage 1 unconscious (1 day); Stage 2
unconscious (2 days); Stage 3 unconscious (3 days).
SPIDER ROOT ITEM 9
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE CONTACT POISON
Price 110 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
A paste made by mashing the fine, threadlike roots of a certain
creeper vine, spider root renders a victim clumsy and maladroit.
Saving Throw DC 28 Fortitude; Onset 1 minute; Maximum
Duration 6 minutes; Stage 1 8d6 poison damage and clumsy
1 (1 minute); Stage 2 9d6 poison damage and clumsy  2
(1 minute); Stage 3 10d6 poison damage and clumsy  3
(1 minute)
TEARS OF DEATH ITEM 20
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE CONTACT POISON VIRULENT
Price 12,000 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Tears of death are among the most powerful of alchemical
poisons, distilled from extracts of five other deadly poisons in
just the right ratios.
Saving Throw DC 46 Fortitude; Onset 1 minute; Maximum
Duration 10 minutes; Stage 1 18d6 poison damage and
paralyzed (1 round); Stage 2 25d6 poison damage and
paralyzed (1 minute); Stage 3 30d6 poison damage and
paralyzed (1 minute)
WOLFSBANE ITEM 10
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE INGESTED POISON
Price 155 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Wolfsbane appears in folklore for its link to werecreatures.
If you are afflicted with lycanthropy and survive stage 3 of
wolfsbane, you’re immediately cured of the lycanthropy.
553
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Saving Throw DC 30 Fortitude; Onset 10 minutes; Maximum
Duration 6 minutes; Stage 1 12d6 poison damage (1 minute);
Stage 2 16d6 poison damage (1 minute); Stage 3 20d6 poison
damage (1 minute)
WYVERN POISON ITEM 8
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE INJURY POISON
Price 80 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate[three-actions] Interact
Properly harvested and preserved, the poison
from a wyvern’s sting is effective and direct.
Saving Throw DC 26 Fortitude; Maximum
Duration 6 rounds; Stage 1 5d6 poison damage
(1 round); Stage 2 6d6 poison damage (1 round);
Stage 3 8d6 poison damage (1 round)
Alchemical Tools
Alchemical tools are consumable items you don’t drink.
PHILOSOPHER’S STONE ITEM 20
UNCOMMON ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE
Price —
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk 2
Activate [one-action] Interact or 1 or more days; see below
An alchemist with the Craft Philosopher’s Stone feat can
create a philosopher’s stone once per month by spending 1
batch of infused reagents during their daily preparations
using the advanced alchemy class feature. This is the only
way to create a philosopher’s stone.
At a glance, a philosopher’s stone appears to be an ordinary,
sooty piece of natural rock. Breaking the rock open with a
Force Open action (DC 35) reveals a cavity at the stone’s
heart. The cavity is lined with a rare type of quicksilver that
can transmute base metals into precious metals or create
an elixir of rejuvenation (page 548).
To use the quicksilver, you must be legendary in Crafting
and have the Alchemical Crafting feat. You can then use the
stone’s quicksilver for one of two effects:
• You can apply the stone’s quicksilver to an
infused true elixir of life using an Interact
action. This turns the elixir into an infused elixir
of rejuvenation instantaneously. This doesn’t
require any crafting time or additional materials.
• You can spend up to a month of downtime applying
the quicksilver either to iron to create silver or to lead
to create gold. Treat this as a 20th-level task to Earn
Income using Crafting, except that you create 500 gp
worth of your chosen metal per day on a success or
750 gp worth per day on a critical success.
SILVERSHEEN ITEM 2
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE
Price 6 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
You can slather this silvery paste onto one melee weapon,
one thrown weapon, or 10 pieces of ammunition. Silversheen
spoils quickly, so once you open a vial, you must use it all
at once, rather than saving it. For the next hour, the weapon
or ammunition counts as silver instead of its normal precious
material (such as cold iron) for any physical damage it deals.
SMOKESTICK ITEM 1+
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
With a sharp twist of this item, you
instantly create a screen of thick, opaque
smoke in a burst centered on one corner of
your space. All creatures within that area are
concealed, and all other creatures are concealed to
them. The smoke lasts for 1 minute or until dispersed by
a strong wind.
Type lesser; Level 1; Price 3 gp
The radius of the burst is 5 feet.
Type greater; Level 7; Price 53 gp
The radius of the burst is 20 feet.
SNAKE OIL ITEM 1
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE
Price 2 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
You can apply snake oil onto a wound or other outward
symptom of an affliction or condition (such as sores from a
disease or discoloration from a poison). For the next hour, the
symptom disappears and the wounded or afflicted creature
doesn’t feel as if it still has the wound or affliction, though all
effects remain. A creature can uncover the ruse by succeeding
at a DC 17 Perception check, but only if it uses a Seek action
to specifically examine the snake oil’s effects.
SUNROD ITEM 1
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE LIGHT
Price 3 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
This 1-foot-long, gold-tipped rod glows after it’s struck on a
hard surface. For the next 6 hours, it sheds bright light in a
20-foot radius (and dim light to the next 40 feet).
TINDERTWIG ITEM 1
ALCHEMICAL CONSUMABLE FIRE
Price 2 sp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk —
Activate [one-action] Interact
An alchemical substance applied to one end of this tiny wooden
stick ignites when struck against a rough surface. Creating a
flame with a tindertwig is much faster than creating a flame
with flint and steel. You can ignite the tindertwig and touch
it to a flammable object as part of the same Interact action.
Core Rulebook
554
Armor
Suits of armor can be crafted from precious materials or
infused with magic to grant them abilities exceeding those
of typical armor. Many suits of magic armor are created
by etching runes onto them, as described on page 580.
The magic armor stat block lists the Price and
attributes of the most common armors you can
make with fundamental runes. Other special
suits of armor might be made of precious
materials, and some are specially crafted
items all on their own.
Precious Material Armor
Suits of armor made of precious
materials are more expensive and
sometimes grant special effects.
You can make leather armor
out of dragonhide, wooden
armor out of darkwood, and metal armor
out of any precious materials except for
darkwood. Because armor’s Bulk is
reduced when the armor is worn, use
its carried Bulk when determining
its material Price. (Materials are on
page 577.)
ADAMANTINE ARMOR ITEM 12+
UNCOMMON
Usage worn armor; Bulk varies by
armor
Adamantine armor has a shiny, black appearance and is
amazingly durable.
Type standard-grade adamantine armor; Level 12; Price 1,600
gp + 160 gp per Bulk; Craft Requirements The initial raw
materials must include adamantine worth at least 200 gp
+ 20 gp per Bulk.
Type high-grade adamantine armor; Level 19; Price
32,000 gp + 3,200 gp per Bulk; Craft Requirements The
initial raw materials must include adamantine worth at
least 16,000 gp + 1,600 gp per Bulk.
COLD IRON ARMOR ITEM 5+
Usage worn armor; Bulk varies by armor
Cold iron armor sickens certain creatures that touch it. A
creature with weakness to cold iron (such as most demons
and fey) that critically fails an unarmed attack against a
creature in cold iron armor becomes sickened 1. A creature
with weakness to cold iron is sickened 1 as long as it wears
cold iron armor.
Type low-grade cold iron armor; Level 5; Price 140 gp + 14 gp
per Bulk; Craft Requirements The initial raw materials must
include cold iron worth at least 70 sp + 7 sp per Bulk
Type standard-grade cold iron armor; Level 11; Price 1,200
gp + 120 gp per Bulk; Craft Requirements The initial raw
materials must include at least 150 gp of cold iron + 15 gp
per Bulk.
Type high-grade cold iron armor; Level 18; Price 20,000 gp
+ 2,000 gp per Bulk; Craft Requirements The initial raw
materials must include cold iron worth at least 10,000 gp
+ 1,000 gp per Bulk.
DARKWOOD ARMOR ITEM 12+
UNCOMMON
Usage worn armor; Bulk varies by armor
Darkwood armor is 1 Bulk lighter than normal (or
light Bulk if its normal Bulk is 1, with no effect on
armor that normally has light Bulk). It’s easier
to wear than normal wood armor, reducing
the Strength score necessary to ignore its
check penalty by 2 and reducing its Speed
penalty by 5 feet. (There are no types of
wood armor in this book.)
Type standard-grade darkwood
armor; Level 12; Price 1,600 gp + 160 gp per Bulk;
Craft Requirements The initial raw materials must
include darkwood worth at least 200 gp + 20 gp
per Bulk.
Type high-grade darkwood armor; Level 19;
Price 32,000 gp + 3,200 gp per Bulk; Craft
Requirements The initial raw materials must
include darkwood worth at least 16,000 gp
+ 1,600 gp per Bulk.
DRAGONHIDE ARMOR ITEM 12+
UNCOMMON
Usage worn armor; Bulk varies by armor
Dragonhide armor is immune to one damage type based
on the type of dragon it is made from (as listed in the
table on page 579). Wearing armor made from dragonhide
also grants you a +1 circumstance bonus to your AC and
saving throws against attacks and spells that deal the
corresponding damage type.
Type standard-grade dragonhide armor; Level 12; Price 1,600
gp + 160 gp per Bulk; Craft Requirements The initial raw
materials must include dragonhide worth at least 200 gp
+ 20 gp per Bulk.
Type high-grade dragonhide armor; Level 19; Price 32,000
gp + 3,200 gp per Bulk; Craft Requirements The initial
raw materials must include dragonhide worth at least
16,000 gp + 1,600 gp per Bulk.
ELVEN CHAIN ITEM 13+
UNCOMMON
Usage worn armor; Bulk 1
Elven chain is a chain shirt made of mithral (page 579) that
glitters in even the faintest light. It grants a +2 item bonus
to AC and has no check penalty.
Created by elven artisans employing ancient crafting
techniques, elven chain is exceptionally quiet. Unlike other
chain shirts—even other mithral chain shirts—elven chain
does not have the noisy  trait. This suit of armor can be
etched with runes like any other mithral chain shirt.
555
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Type standard-grade elven chain; Level 13; Price 2,500 gp;
Craft Requirements The initial raw materials must include
mithral worth at least 3,125 sp.
Type high-grade elven chain; Level 20; Price 52,000 gp;
Craft Requirements The initial raw materials must include
mithral worth at least 26,000 gp.
MITHRAL ARMOR ITEM 12+
UNCOMMON
Usage worn armor; Bulk varies by armor
Mithral armor is 1 Bulk lighter than normal (or
light Bulk if its normal Bulk is 1, with no effect
on armor that normally has light Bulk). It’s
easier to wear than normal metal armor,
reducing the Strength score necessary
to ignore its check penalty by 2 and
reducing its Speed penalty by 5 feet.
Type standard-grade mithral armor;
Level 12; Price 1,600 gp + 160 gp
per Bulk; Craft Requirements The initial raw
materials must include mithral worth at least
200 gp + 20 gp per Bulk.
Type high-grade mithral armor; Level 19;
Price 32,000 gp + 3,200 gp per Bulk; Craft
Requirements The initial raw materials must
include mithral worth at least 16,000 gp + 1,600 gp per Bulk.
ORICHALCUM ARMOR ITEM 20
RARE
Usage worn armor; Bulk varies by armor
Orichalcum armor can be etched with four magic property
runes instead of three due to the magical empowerment of
orichalcum. If you are wearing armor made of orichalcum, the
armor grants you insights into the future, granting you a +1
circumstance bonus to initiative rolls.
Type high-grade orichalcum armor; Level 20; Price 55,000
gp + 5,500 gp per Bulk; Craft Requirements The initial raw
materials must include orichalcum worth at least 27,500
gp + 2,750 gp per Bulk.
SILVER ARMOR ITEM 5+
Usage worn armor; Bulk varies by armor
Silver armor sickens certain creatures that touch it. A
creature with weakness to silver that critically fails an
unarmed attack against a creature in silver armor becomes
sickened 1. A creature with weakness to silver is sickened 1
as long as it wears silver armor.
Type low-grade silver armor; Level 5; Price 140 gp + 14 gp per
Bulk; Craft Requirements silver worth at least 70 sp + 7 sp
per Bulk
Type standard-grade silver armor; Level 11; Price 1,200 gp
+ 120 gp per Bulk; Craft Requirements The initial raw
materials must include silver worth at least 150 gp + 15 gp
per Bulk.
Type high-grade silver armor; Level 18; Price 20,000 gp +
2,000 gp per Bulk; Craft Requirements The initial raw
materials must include silver worth at least 10,000 gp +
1,000 gp per Bulk.
Basic Magic Armor
The most common special armors are suits of armor with
some combination of armor potency and resilient runes.
The following stat block provides a quick reference for
these types of armor.
MAGIC ARMOR ITEM 5+
ABJURATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Usage worn armor; Bulk varies by armor
A suit of magic armor is simply a suit of
armor or explorer’s clothing etched with
fundamental runes. An armor potency
rune increases the armor’s item bonus
to AC, and a resilient rune adds an item
bonus to saving throws.
The Prices here are for all types of armor.
You don’t need to adjust the Price from leather
armor to full plate or the like. These armors
are made of standard materials, not precious
materials such as mithral.
Type +1 armor; Level 5; Price 160 gp
This armor has a +1 armor potency rune (increase the
item bonus to AC by 1).
Type +1 resilient armor; Level 8; Price 500 gp
This armor has a +1 armor potency rune (increase the item
bonus to AC by 1) and a resilient rune (+1 item bonus to saves).
Type +2 resilient armor; Level 11; Price 1,400 gp
This armor has a +2 armor potency rune (increase the
item bonus to AC by 2) and a resilient rune (+1 item bonus
to saves).
Type +2 greater resilient armor; Level 14; Price 4,500 gp
This armor has a +2 armor potency rune (increase the item
bonus to AC by 2) and a greater resilient rune (+2 item bonus
to saves).
Type +3 greater resilient armor; Level 18; Price 24,000 gp
This armor has a +3 armor potency rune (increase the item
bonus to AC by 3) and a greater resilient rune (+2 item bonus
to saves).
Type +3 major resilient armor; Level 20; Price 70,000 gp
This armor has a +3 armor potency rune (increase the item
bonus to AC by 3) and a major resilient rune (+3 item bonus
to saves).
ARMOR ALTERNATIVES
If you don’t want to wear armor, or you’re trained in
only unarmored defense, you can wear either explorer’s
clothing or bracers of armor. Explorer’s clothing can be
etched with runes just like armor can, so it can provide
item bonuses to AC or saves.
Bracers of armor give a +1 item bonus to AC with no Dex
modifier cap, and also grant a bonus to saves. This item
can be found on page 607.
Core Rulebook
556
Specific Magic Armor
These suits of armor have abilities far different from
what can be gained by etching runes. A specific magic
armor lists its fundamental runes, which you can
upgrade, add, or transfer as normal. You can’t etch
any property runes onto a specific armor that it doesn’t
already have.
BREASTPLATE OF COMMAND ITEM 10+
ENCHANTMENT INVESTED MAGICAL
Usage worn armor; Bulk 2
This +1 resilient breastplate is
made from shining bronze overlaid
with reinforcing golden panels in
the shape of lion’s heads. Wearing
this breastplate grants you a
commanding aura. You gain a
+2 item bonus to Diplomacy
checks, but you take a –2 item
penalty to Stealth checks to
Hide and Sneak and Deception
checks to Impersonate.
Activate [one-action] command; Frequency once
per day; Effect You grant allies within 100
feet a +2 status bonus to saves against fear
effects for 1 minute. When you activate this
ability, each affected ally who’s frightened
reduces their frightened value by 1.
Type breastplate of command; Level 10; Price 1,000 gp
Type greater breastplate of command; Level 18; Price 22,000 gp
The armor is a +2 greater resilient breastplate. The item bonus
and penalty increase to +3 and –3, respectively.
CELESTIAL ARMOR ITEM 13
DIVINE GOOD INVESTED TRANSMUTATION
Price 2,500 gp
Usage worn armor; Bulk 1
This suit of +2 resilient chain mail is made of fine white
links of a strange and slightly translucent pale metal, and
the sleeves and skirt are fashioned into smaller trails that
resemble feathers. Unlike normal chain mail, celestial armor
has no Speed reduction, its armor check penalty is 0, and its
Bulk is 1.
You gain a +1 circumstance bonus to AC and saving throws
against fiends. You appear radiant while you wear the armor,
giving you a +2 item bonus to Diplomacy checks against all
creatures except fiends.
If you are not good, you are drained 2 while wearing
celestial armor. You can’t recover from this condition while
wearing the armor.
Activate [one-action] command; Frequency once per day; Effect The
armor sprouts glowing wings that grant you a fly Speed of
30 feet. The wings shed bright light in a 40-foot radius (and
dim light to the next 40 feet). The wings fade away after
10 minutes.
Craft Requirements You are good.
DEMON ARMOR ITEM 13
DIVINE EVIL INVESTED NECROMANCY
Price 2,500 gp
Usage worn armor; Bulk 4
Crafted from black iron, this crude suit of +2 resilient full
plate is designed to make you look like a horned demon, with
your face peering out of the screaming maw of the beast.
While wearing the armor, you can attack with the helmet’s
horns. They are a martial melee weapon with the effects of a
+2 weapon potency rune. They deal 2d8
piercing damage and have the deadly d12
trait. On a critical hit with the horns, the
target must attempt a DC 30 Fortitude
save against the Abyssal plague disease
(page 316). The horns can’t be etched
with any runes.
If you aren’t evil, you’re
drained 2 and can’t recover
from this condition while
wearing demon armor.
Activate [two-actions] command;
Frequency once per day; Effect You
cast dimension door.
Craft Requirements You are evil; supply one
casting of dimension door.
DRAGONPLATE ITEM 16
UNCOMMON EVOCATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Price 10,000 gp
Usage worn armor; Bulk 4
This suit of +2 greater resilient dragonhide full plate makes
you look like a fearsome dragon. The armor comes in 10
varieties corresponding to the 10 common dragon types,
though other varieties undoubtedly exist.
Activate[two-actions] Interact; Frequency once per day; Effect You
unleash a bout of dragon breath with a shape, damage type,
and saving throw corresponding to the type of dragon used
to make the armor (shown on the table below). The breath
weapon deals 14d6 damage; each creature in the area must
attempt a DC 36 basic saving throw.
 Protects
Dragon Type Against Breath Weapon (Save)
Black or copper acid 30-foot line of acid (Reflex)
Blue or bronze electricity 30-foot line of electricity (Reflex)
Brass fire 30-foot line of fire (Reflex)
Green poison 15-foot cone of poison (Fortitude)
Gold or red fire 15-foot cone of fire (Reflex)
Silver or white cold 15-foot cone of cold (Reflex)
Craft Requirements The initial raw materials must include
1,250 gp of dragonhide.
ELECTRIC EELSKIN ITEM 10
INVESTED MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 950 gp
557
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
MAIL OF LUCK ITEM 13
DIVINATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Price 2,600 gp
Usage worn armor; Bulk 3
This suit of +2 resilient splint mail has a large, green gemstone
inset in a prominent location.
Activate [free-action] envision; Frequency once per day; Trigger You
are hit or critically hit with an attack, but damage hasn’t
been rolled yet; Effect You force the attacker to reroll the
attack roll and use the worse result. This effect has the
misfortune trait.
Activating the armor causes the gemstone to turn gray
and become inert. You cannot activate the armor again until
the stone returns to its original green color. The gem turns
green again after 1 week or when a significant foe critically
succeeds at an attack roll targeting you. (If an enemy rolls
a critical success at an attack against you and you force the
attacker to reroll that critical success, that critical success
does not recharge the mail of luck.) Even if the armor’s power
returns before a week has elapsed, it can’t be activated more
than once per day.
MOONLIT CHAIN ITEM 7
DIVINATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Price 360 gp
Usage worn armor; Bulk 2
This +1 silver chain shirt has a collar adorned with stitched
images of the phases of the moon. You can see in moonlight
as though you had low-light vision.
Activate [one-action] Interact; Frequency once per day; Effect You
touch the stitched image of the new moon on the armor’s
collar and suppress the dazzled condition for 1 minute.
Craft Requirements The initial raw materials must include
33 gp of silver.
PLATE ARMOR OF THE DEEP ITEM 15
UNCOMMON ABJURATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Price 6,500 gp
Usage worn armor; Bulk 4
This suit of +2 greater resilient full plate is decorated with
swirling, ornate motifs of waves and fish scales. While
wearing it, you take no Speed reduction or check penalty
from armor when Swimming, gain a +2 item bonus to
Athletics checks to Swim, can breathe underwater, and can
speak Aquan.
RHINO HIDE ITEM 9
INVESTED MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 700 gp
Usage worn armor; Bulk 2
This +1 resilient hide armor is made from rhinoceros hide. It
has an armor check penalty of –1 instead of –3. When you
use the Sudden Charge class feat while wearing this armor,
your Strike deals an additional 1d8 damage.
Craft Requirements The initial raw materials must include
320 gp of rhinoceros hide (a common material).
Usage worn armor; Bulk 1
Shining, slippery eelskin covers the plates of this +1 resilient
greater slick leather armor. The armor gives you the ability
to breathe water and grants you a +2 item bonus to Athletics
checks to Swim and Stealth checks you attempt in the water.
Activate [two-actions] command, Interact; Frequency once per hour;
Effect You cast a 2nd-level shocking grasp with a DC of 29.
Craft Requirements Supply one casting of shocking grasp.
GHOUL HIDE ITEM 6
UNCOMMON INVESTED MAGICAL NECROMANCY
Price 220 gp
Usage worn armor; Bulk 2
Stitched together from pieces of ghoul skin, this suit of +1
hide armor grants you a +1 item bonus to saving throws
against disease and paralysis and makes you immune to the
paralysis of ghouls. Ghoul hide with a resilient rune increases
the resilient rune’s item bonus to saving throws against
disease and paralysis by 1 (maximum +4).
Ghoul hide hisses with sibilant hatred at the touch of
elves. When worn by a creature with the elf trait, the armor
gains the noisy trait.
IMPENETRABLE SCALE ITEM 17
UNCOMMON ABJURATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Price 12,800 gp
Usage worn armor; Bulk 3
Made of overlapping, lustrous black scales of standard-grade
adamantine, this +2 greater resilient fortification adamantine
scale mail seems to momentarily thicken at the point of impact
when hit. Whenever the armor’s fortification rune successfully
turns a significant foe’s critical hit into a normal hit, one of
the scales on the armor turns violet. You gain resistance to
physical damage equal to the number of violet scales, to a
maximum of 8.
At dawn each day, all the violet scales return to normal.
Craft Requirements The initial raw materials must include
1,600 gp of adamantine.
Core Rulebook
558
Consumables
This section includes magic items with the consumable
trait. An item with this trait can be used only once. Unless
stated otherwise, it is destroyed after activation. When
a character creates consumable items, they can make
them in batches of four, as described in the Craft activity.
Consumables includes the following subcategories, with
any special rules appearing at the start of the section.
• Ammunition begins on this page.
• Oils appear on page 561.
• Potions are described on page 562.
• Scrolls are listed on page 564.
• Talismans begin on page 565.
• Other Consumables begins on page 570.
Ammunition
These magic items are ammunition for ranged weapons.
Each item’s stat block includes an Ammunition entry that
lists which type of ammunition it can be Crafted as, or
“any” if it’s not limited to any particular type. All stat
blocks for ammunition omit the Usage and Bulk entries; use
the standard rules in Chapter 6: Equipment for the type of
ammunition to determine reloading times and Bulk.
When using magic ammunition, use your ranged
weapon’s fundamental runes to determine the attack
modifier and damage dice. Don’t add the effects of your
weapon’s property runes unless the ammunition states
otherwise—the ammunition creates its own effects. Magic
ammunition deals damage on a hit normally in addition
to any listed effects unless its description states otherwise.
Regardless of whether an attack with magic ammunition
hits or misses, launching the ammunition consumes its
magic. Magic ammunition is made of normal materials,
not precious materials, unless stated otherwise.
Activated Ammunition
If magic ammunition doesn’t have an Activate entry, it’s
activated automatically when it’s launched. Types of magic
ammunition that have an Activate entry must be activated
with additional actions before being used. Once you activate
the ammunition, you must shoot it before the end of your
turn. Otherwise, it deactivates (but it isn’t consumed) and
you must activate it again before you can use it. If you shoot
the ammunition without activating it first, it functions as
non-magical ammunition and is still consumed.
The action required to activate the ammunition doesn’t
alter how many actions it takes to reload. For example,
you could activate a beacon shot arrow by touching it with
1 action, then draw and shoot the arrow as part of a Strike
as normal. For a beacon shot bolt, you could activate it,
load it into a crossbow, then shoot it, or load it into the
crossbow, then activate it, and then shoot it.
BEACON SHOT ITEM 3
CONSUMABLE EVOCATION MAGICAL
Price 10 gp
Ammunition arrow, bolt
Activate [one-action] Interact
The shaft of a beacon shot is studded with tiny flecks of
glimmering gemstones. When an activated beacon shot hits a
target, it embeds itself into that target and spews sparks for
1 minute. If the target is invisible, it becomes merely hidden
to creatures who would otherwise be unable to see it. The
sparks also negate the concealed condition if the target was
otherwise concealed.
A creature can remove the arrow or bolt by using an Interact
basic action and succeeding at a DC 20 Athletics check.
CLIMBING BOLT ITEM 4
CONJURATION CONSUMABLE MAGICAL
Price 15 gp
Ammunition bolt
The shaft of this bolt is wrapped with fine twine. When the
bolt strikes a solid surface, the twine unwinds and enlarges
into a 50-foot-long rope, securely fastened to the surface the
bolt struck. The rope can be pulled free with an Interact action
and a successful DC 20 Athletics check.
DISINTEGRATION BOLT ITEM 15
UNCOMMON CONSUMABLE EVOCATION MAGICAL
Price 1,300 gp
Ammunition bolt
Activate [one-action] Interact
The shaft of this bolt is scorched and blackened, and handling
it coats your fingers with a fine black powder. When an
activated disintegration bolt hits a target, it is subject to a
disintegrate spell requiring a DC 34 Fortitude save. As with
the spell, a critical hit on the attack roll causes the target’s
saving throw outcome to be one degree worse.
Craft Requirements Supply one casting of disintegrate.
EXPLOSIVE AMMUNITION ITEM 9+
CONSUMABLE EVOCATION FIRE MAGICAL
Ammunition any
Activate [one-action] Interact
This piece of ammunition is coated in gritty black soot. When
activated explosive ammunition hits a target, the missile
explodes in a 10-foot burst, dealing 6d6 fire damage to each
creature in the area (including the target). Each creature must
attempt a DC 25 basic Reflex save.
Type standard; Level 9; Price 130 gp
Type greater; Level 13; Price 520 gp
The damage is 10d6 and the save DC is 30.
GHOST AMMUNITION ITEM 14
MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Ammunition any
Price 900 gp
Ghost ammunition is cool to the touch. This ammunition has
the benefits of the ghost touch property rune and can fly
through any obstacle except those that can block incorporeal
creatures or effects. Though the ammunition penetrates
559
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
barriers and ignores all cover, the target still benefits from
the flat check from being concealed or hidden. You still can’t
target an undetected creature without guessing.
After it is launched, the ammunition vanishes into mist.
However, in the dead of the night 1d4 days later, it reappears
in the last quiver or other container it was taken from.
PENETRATING AMMUNITION ITEM 12
CONSUMABLE MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 400 gp
Ammunition arrow, bolt
Activate [one-action] Interact
This ammunition has a slender shape and a viciously pointed
tip. When you activate and shoot penetrating ammunition, the
Strike takes the shape of a 60-foot line originating from you.
Roll one attack roll and compare the result to the AC of each
target in the line. The ammunition ignores up to 10 of a target’s
resistance, and it can penetrate walls up to 1 foot thick with
Hardness 10 or less. Each target that takes damage from this
ammunition also takes 1d6 persistent bleed damage.
If your attack roll result is a natural 20, you improve your
degree of success only against the first target in the line, but
you can still score a critical hit on other targets if your result
exceeds their AC by 10 or more. If you have access to your bow’s
critical specialization effect, penetrating ammunition applies
that effect only against a target in the last square of the line.
SHINING AMMUNITION ITEM 1
CONSUMABLE EVOCATION LIGHT MAGICAL
Price 3 gp
Ammunition any
A piece of shining ammunition gives off a faint glow. When
shot, this ammunition sheds bright light in a 20-foot radius
(and dim light to the next 20 feet) for 10 minutes. If it hits
a target, it sticks, causing the target to shed light in the
same radius. A creature can remove the ammunition with an
Interact action, but the ammunition itself continues to glow
for the rest of the duration or until destroyed.
SLEEP ARROW ITEM 3
CONSUMABLE ENCHANTMENT MAGICAL MENTAL SLEEP
Price 11 gp
Ammunition arrow
Activate [one-action] Interact
Sleep arrows often have shafts of deep blue or black, and
their fletching is exceptionally soft and downy. An activated
sleep arrow deals no damage, but a living creature hit by it is
subject to the effects of a sleep spell (DC 17).
Craft Requirements Supply one casting of sleep.
SPELLSTRIKE AMMUNITION ITEM 3+
CONSUMABLE MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Ammunition any
Activate[two-actions] Cast a Spell
Mystic patterns create a magic reservoir within this
ammunition. You activate spellstrike ammunition by Casting
a Spell into the ammunition. The spell must be of a spell level
the ammunition can hold, and the spell must be able to target
a creature other than the caster. A creature hit by activated
spellstrike ammunition is targeted by the spell. If the creature
isn’t a valid target for the spell, the spell is lost.
The ammunition affects only the target hit, even if the
spell would normally affect more than one target. If the spell
requires a spell attack roll, use the result of your ranged attack
roll with the ammunition to determine the degree of success
of the spell. If the spell requires a saving throw, the target
attempts the save against your spell DC.
The maximum level of spell the ammunition can hold
determines its item level and Price.
Type I; Level 3; Price 12 gp; Maximum Spell Level 1st
Type II; Level 5; Price 30 gp; Maximum Spell Level 2nd
Type III; Level 7; Price 70 gp; Maximum Spell Level 3rd
Type IV; Level 9; Price 150 gp; Maximum Spell Level 4th
Type V; Level 11; Price 300 gp; Maximum Spell Level 5th
Type VI; Level 13; Price 600 gp; Maximum Spell Level 6th
Type VII; Level 15; Price 1,300 gp; Maximum Spell Level 7th
Type VIII; Level 17; Price 3,000 gp; Maximum Spell Level 8th
Type IX; Level 19; Price 8,000 gp; Maximum Spell Level 9th
STONE BULLET ITEM 15
CONSUMABLE MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 1,300 gp
Ammunition sling bullet
Activate [one-action] Interact
This sling bullet looks like a petrified serpent’s eye. A creature
hit by an activated stone bullet is subject to the effects of a
6th-level flesh to stone spell (DC 34).
Craft Requirements Supply one casting of flesh to stone.
STORM ARROW ITEM 9
AIR CONSUMABLE ELECTRICITY EVOCATION MAGICAL
Price 130 gp
Ammunition arrow
Activate [one-action] Interact
The head of this arrow is made from gleaming copper.
When an activated storm arrow hits a target, it is buffeted
by raging winds and struck by a bolt of lightning that deals
3d12 electricity damage and the target must attempt a DC 25
Reflex saving throw. If this arrow is shot from a weapon with
a shock property rune, the save DC increases to 27, though
the attack doesn’t benefit from the shock property rune itself.
Critical Success The foe is unaffected.
Success The foe takes half damage and isn’t affected by the wind.
Failure The foe takes full damage and is buffeted by winds for
1 round, taking a –2 circumstance penalty to ranged attack
rolls and a –10-foot circumstance penalty to its fly Speed.
Critical Failure As failure, but the foe takes double damage.
VINE ARROW ITEM 3
CONJURATION CONSUMABLE MAGICAL
Price 10 gp
Ammunition arrow
Core Rulebook
560
Activate [one-action] command
Leafy stalks protrude from the shaft of this rustic arrow. When
an activated vine arrow hits a target, the arrow’s shaft splits
and grows, wrapping the target in vines. The target takes a
–10-foot circumstance penalty to its Speeds for 2d4 rounds, or
until it Escapes against a DC of 19. On a critical hit, the target
is also immobilized until it Escapes.
VIPER ARROW ITEM 4
CONJURATION CONSUMABLE MAGICAL
Price 17 gp
Ammunition arrow
Activate [one-action] command
The shaft of this arrow is covered in fine green scales, and its
iron head comes to a pair of points almost like fangs. After an
activated viper arrow hits a target, the arrow transforms into
a viper (Pathfinder Bestiary 302). The target is affected by the
viper’s poison, as if it had been bitten. The viper then lands in
an open space adjacent to the target.
The viper has the summoned trait and acts at the end of your
turn, even though you didn’t use the Sustain a Spell action. It is
under the GM’s control, but it generally attacks the creature the
arrow struck. The viper vanishes after 1 minute or when slain.
Craft Requirements Supply one casting of summon animal.
Oils
Oils are magical gels, ointments, pastes, or salves that
are typically applied to an object and are used up in the
process. They have the oil trait. Applying an oil usually
takes two hands: one to hold the jar containing the oil,
and another to extract the oil and apply it. You can
only apply an oil to an item or creature within your
reach. Because the process is so thorough, it is usually
impossible to apply an oil to an unwilling target or an
item in the possession of an unwilling target unless that
target is paralyzed, petrified, or unconscious.
ANTIMAGIC OIL ITEM 20
RARE ABJURATION CONSUMABLE MAGICAL OIL
Price 13,000 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
This oil contains energy that repels nearly all types of magic.
When you apply this oil to armor, the creature wearing the
armor becomes immune to all spells, effects of magic items
(the wearer’s and those of others), and effects with the magical
trait for 1 minute. The oil affects neither the magic of the armor
nor the fundamental runes of weapons attacking the wearer.
Magical effects from a source of 20th level or higher, such as a
deity, still function on the armor’s wearer.
ALIGNED OIL ITEM 9
CONSUMABLE DIVINE EVOCATION OIL
Price 140 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
This oil fills a weapon with cosmic power of an alignment. Each
aligned oil is crafted to one alignment: chaos, evil, good, or law
(such as a good-aligned oil). A weapon anointed with this oil
gains the effects of the property rune matching its alignment:
anarchic (chaos), axiomatic (law), holy (good), or unholy (evil).
This lasts for 1 minute.
NECTAR OF PURIFICATION ITEM 1
CONSUMABLE MAGICAL NECROMANCY OIL
Price 3 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
A shimmering liquid, nectar of purification is often stored
in bottles similar to those used for vinegar. This oil casts a
1st-level purify food and drink spell over any food or drink onto
which it’s poured. The nectar evaporates as it takes effect,
leaving the taste and texture of the food or drink unaltered.
OBFUSCATION OIL ITEM 15
CONSUMABLE ILLUSION MAGICAL OIL
Price 1,200 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
You can spread this blue-gray gel on a single item with a Bulk
of 3 or less to ward it against magical detection. It becomes
immune to divination magic of 8th level or lower (such as
locate). This oil is permanent, but it can be removed with acid.
Removing the oil in this way usually takes 1 minute for objects
with Bulk of 1 or less, or a number of minutes equal to the
item’s Bulk.
OIL OF ANIMATION ITEM 12
UNCOMMON CONSUMABLE MAGICAL OIL TRANSMUTATION
Price 330 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
You can rub this bronze-colored oil onto a melee weapon to
grant it the benefits of the dancing rune (page 583). Once
you fail a flat check for the weapon, causing it to fall, this
effect ends.
OIL OF KEEN EDGES ITEM 11
UNCOMMON CONSUMABLE MAGICAL OIL TRANSMUTATION
Price 250 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
When this silvery salve is applied to a melee weapon that
deals piercing or slashing damage, the weapon grows sharper
and more dangerous for 1 minute, granting it the benefits of
the keen rune.
OIL OF MENDING ITEM 3
CONSUMABLE MAGICAL OIL TRANSMUTATION
Price 9 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate 1 minute (Interact)
561
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
A vial of oil of mending appears to have countless translucent
threads swirling within. Applying this oil to an item casts a
2nd-level mending spell to repair the item.
OIL OF POTENCY ITEM 2
CONSUMABLE MAGICAL OIL TRANSMUTATION
Price 7 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
When you apply this thick, viscous oil to a non-magical weapon
or suit of armor, that item immediately becomes magically
potent. If the item is a weapon, it temporarily becomes a
+1 striking weapon, or, if it’s armor, it temporarily becomes
+1 resilient armor. This lasts for 1 minute.
OIL OF REPULSION ITEM 11
ABJURATION CONSUMABLE MAGICAL OIL
Price 175 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
This oil contains magnetically charged iron filings repelled into
opposite ends of the vial. For 1 minute after you apply this oil
to armor, any creature that hits you with a melee Strike must
attempt a DC 28 Fortitude save with the following effects.
Success The creature is unaffected.
Failure The creature is pushed up to 10 feet away from you
(the GM determines the direction).
Critical Failure As failure, and the creature is also knocked prone.
OIL OF WEIGHTLESSNESS ITEM 2+
CONSUMABLE MAGICAL OIL TRANSMUTATION
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
You can spread this shimmering oil on an item of 1 Bulk or less
to make it feel weightless. It has negligible Bulk for 1 hour.
Type oil of weightlessness; Level 2; Price 6 gp
Type greater oil of weightlessness; Level 6; Price 36 gp
This oil can affect an item of 2 Bulk or less and lasts 8 hours.
SALVE OF ANTIPARALYSIS ITEM 6+
CONSUMABLE HEALING MAGICAL NECROMANCY OIL
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Applying this filmy salve to a creature helps it overcome
magical paralysis. The creature recovers as if it were the
target of a 3rd-level remove paralysis spell.
Type salve of antiparalysis; Level 6; Price 40 gp
Type greater salve of antiparalysis; Level 12; Price 325 gp
A greater salve of antiparalysis can potentially remove
petrification. The creature recovers as if it were the target
of both a 6th-level remove paralysis spell and a stone to
flesh spell.
SALVE OF SLIPPERINESS ITEM 5
CONSUMABLE MAGICAL OIL TRANSMUTATION
Price 25 gp Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
This greenish, persistent grease can be applied to armor
to make it extremely slippery for 8 hours, granting the
wearer a +2 item bonus to Acrobatics checks to Escape or
to Squeeze.
Potions
A potion is a magical liquid activated when you drink it,
which uses it up. Potions have the potion trait. You can
activate a potion with an Interact action as you drink it
or feed it to another creature. You can feed a potion only
to a creature that is within reach and willing or otherwise
so helpless that it can’t resist. You usually need only one
hand to consume a potion or feed it to another creature.
BARKSKIN POTION ITEM 4
ABJURATION CONSUMABLE POTION PRIMAL
Price 15 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
After you drink this bitter draft, your skin thickens like
bark. You gain the effects of a 2nd-level barkskin spell for
10 minutes.
DRAGON’S BREATH POTION ITEM 7+
CONSUMABLE EVOCATION MAGICAL POTION
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
This liquid contains blood from a certain type of dragon. For
1 hour after you imbibe the concoction, you can unleash a
breath weapon used by that type of dragon. The potency of
the breath depends on the potion’s type, based on the age
of the dragon whose blood was used to make the potion.
This potion has the trait matching the damage type of the
breath weapon.
Exhaling dragon breath uses a single action. The damage
type and the area of the dragon breath depend on the type
of dragon blood in the potion, as shown in the table below.
Regardless of the dragon type, the breath weapon deals 4d6
damage, and each creature in the area must attempt a DC 23
basic save of a type determined by the type of the dragon.
After you use the breath weapon, you can’t do so again for
1d4 rounds.
Type young; Level 7; Price 70 gp
Type adult; Level 12; Price 400 gp
The damage is 6d6 and the save DC is 29.
Type wyrm; Level 17; Price 3,000 gp
The damage is 10d6 and the save DC is 37.
Dragon Type Breath Weapon (Save)
Black or copper 30-foot line of acid (Reflex)
Blue or bronze 30-foot line of electricity (Reflex)
Brass 30-foot line of fire (Reflex)
Green 15-foot cone of poison (Fortitude)
Gold or red 15-foot cone of fire (Reflex)
Silver or white 15-foot cone of cold (Reflex)
Core Rulebook
562
HEALING POTION ITEM 1+
CONSUMABLE HEALING MAGICAL NECROMANCY POTION
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
A healing potion is a vial of a ruby-red liquid that imparts a
tingling sensation as the drinker’s wounds heal rapidly. When
you drink a healing potion, you regain the listed number of
Hit Points.
Type minor; Level 1; Price 4 gp
The potion restores 1d8 Hit Points.
Type lesser; Level 3; Price 12 gp
The potion restores 2d8+5 Hit Points.
Type moderate; Level 6; Price 50 gp
The potion restores 3d8+10 Hit Points.
Type greater; Level 12; Price 400 gp
The potion restores 6d8+20 Hit Points.
Type major; Level 18; Price 5,000 gp
The potion restores 8d8+30 Hit Points.
INVISIBILITY POTION ITEM 4
UNCOMMON CONSUMABLE ILLUSION MAGICAL POTION
Price 20 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
An invisibility potion is colorless and oddly lightweight. Upon
drinking it, you gain the effects of a 2nd-level invisibility spell.
PANACEA ITEM 13
UNCOMMON CONSUMABLE HEALING MAGICAL NECROMANCY POTION
Price 450 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
This potion appears to shift colors, and no two observers
describe it in the same way. When consumed, it attempts to
counteract all curses and diseases affecting you, as well as
the blinded and deafened conditions from spells affecting you.
The potion has a counteract level of 7 and a +20 modifier for
the roll.
POTION OF FLYING ITEM 8+
CONSUMABLE MAGICAL POTION TRANSMUTATION
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Upon drinking this effervescent concoction, you gain a fly
Speed of 40 feet for 1 minute.
Type standard; Level 8; Price 100 gp
Type greater; Level 15; Price 1,000 gp
The fly Speed lasts for 1 hour.
POTION OF LEAPING ITEM 5
CONSUMABLE MAGICAL POTION TRANSMUTATION
Price 21 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
For 1 minute after you drink this fizzy potion, whenever you
Leap, you gain the effect of the 1st-level jump spell.
POTION OF QUICKNESS ITEM 8
CONSUMABLE MAGICAL POTION TRANSMUTATION
Price 90 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Drinking this silver potion grants you the effects of haste for 1
minute.
POTION OF RESISTANCE ITEM 6+
ABJURATION CONSUMABLE MAGICAL POTION
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Drinking this thick, fortifying potion grants resistance
against a single damage type for 1 hour. Each potion
of resistance is created to defend against acid, cold,
electricity, fire, or sonic damage (and is called a
lesser potion of fire resistance or the like).
Type lesser; Level 6; Price 45 gp
You gain resistance 5 to the appropriate energy type.
Type moderate; Level 10; Price 180 gp
You gain resistance 10 to the appropriate energy type.
Type greater; Level 14; Price 850 gp
You gain resistance 15 to the appropriate energy type.
POTION OF SWIMMING ITEM 6+
CONSUMABLE MAGICAL POTION TRANSMUTATION
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
This potion tastes like salt water, and sandy grit settles to the
bottom of its container. When you drink it, you gain a swim
Speed equal to your land Speed for 10 minutes.
Type moderate; Level 6; Price 50 gp
Type greater; Level 11; Price 250 gp
The swim Speed lasts for 1 hour.
POTION OF TONGUES ITEM 12
UNCOMMON CONSUMABLE DIVINATION MAGICAL POTION
Price 320 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
This sour potion enlivens your tongue with unusual flavors and
uncommon eloquence, allowing you to speak and understand
all languages for 4 hours after you drink it. This doesn’t allow
you to read these languages in their written form.
POTION OF UNDETECTABILITY ITEM 18
CONSUMABLE ILLUSION MAGICAL POTION
Price 4,400 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Drinking this dull-black liquid makes you undetectable to
divinations. This grants the same effects as mind blank, but
without the bonus against mental effects. You also gain the
effects of a 4th-level invisibility spell, which protects against
see invisibility spells of 8th level and lower and has a DC of 36
against true seeing. The potion’s effects last for 10 minutes.
563
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
POTION OF WATER BREATHING ITEM 3
CONSUMABLE MAGICAL POTION TRANSMUTATION
Price 11 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
This filmy, gray potion smells of an old fish midden and tastes
even worse. After drinking this potion, you gain the effects of
a 2nd-level water breathing spell for 1 hour.
SHRINKING POTION ITEM 4+
CONSUMABLE MAGICAL POTION TRANSMUTATION
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact; Onset 1 minute
This fungus-flavored potion conveys the effects of the shrink
spell to make you and all your gear smaller. After the onset,
you remain small for 10 minutes.
Type standard; Level 4; Price 15 gp
Type greater; Level 8; Price 90 gp
This potion has no onset, lasts for 1 hour, and grants the
effects of a 4th-level shrink spell. In addition, you gain a +2
item bonus to Stealth checks while shrunken.
SERUM OF SEX SHIFT ITEM 7
CONSUMABLE MAGICAL POTION TRANSMUTATION
Price 60 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Upon drinking this potion, your biology instantly transforms to
take on a set of sexual characteristics of your choice, changing
your appearance and physiology accordingly. You have mild
control over the details of this change, but you retain a strong
“family resemblance” to your former appearance.
The magic functions instantaneously and can’t be
counteracted. Your new anatomy is as healthy and functional
as your previous body’s, potentially allowing you to procreate
(depending on your ancestry’s biology). Drinking a subsequent
serum of sex shift allows you to either revert back to your
original form or adopt other sexual characteristics, as you
choose. The elixir has no effect if you are pregnant or from
an ancestry with no sexual differentiation. Most ancestries
have a wide spectrum of sexual differentiation, some common,
others more rare.
TRUESIGHT POTION ITEM 16
CONSUMABLE DIVINATION MAGICAL POTION
Price 1,500 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Upon drinking this clear, refreshing potion, you can see things
as they actually are. You gain the benefits of a 7th-level true
seeing spell that has a counteract modifier of +25.
TRUTH POTION ITEM 6
UNCOMMON CONSUMABLE ENCHANTMENT MAGICAL MENTAL POTION
Price 46 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
For 10 minutes after drinking this astringent potion, you
can’t intentionally lie and may be compelled to tell the truth.
Upon drinking the potion, attempt a DC 19 Will save. You can
voluntarily fail or critically fail.
Success The potion does not affect you.
Failure When you speak, you must tell the truth.
Critical Failure As failure, and when someone asks you a
question, you must attempt another DC 19 Will saving
throw. If you fail this saving throw, you must answer the
question truthfully if you are able to do so; if you succeed,
you are temporarily immune to further attempts to ask the
same question within the potion’s duration.
Scrolls
A scroll contains a single spell that you can cast without
having to expend a spell slot. A scroll can be Crafted to
contain nearly any spell, so the types of scrolls available
are limited only by the number of spells in the game. The
exceptions are cantrips, focus spells, and rituals, none of
which can be put on scrolls. The spell on a scroll can
be cast only once, and the scroll is destroyed as part of
the casting. The spell on the scroll is cast at a particular
spell level, as determined by the scroll. For instance, a
scroll of magic missile (1st level) can be used to cast the
1st-level version of magic missile, but not a magic missile
heightened to 2nd level. If no level is listed, the scroll can
be used to cast the spell at its lowest level.
If you find a scroll, you can try to figure out what spell
it contains. If the spell is a common spell from your spell
list or a spell you know, you can spend a single Recall
Knowledge action and automatically succeed at identifying
the scroll’s spell. If it’s not, you must use Identify Magic
(page 238) to learn what spell the scroll holds.
Casting a Spell from a Scroll
Casting a Spell from a scroll requires holding the scroll
in one hand and activating it with a Cast a Spell activity
using the normal number of actions for that spell.
To Cast a Spell from a scroll, the spell must appear on
your spell list. Because you’re the one Casting the Spell,
use your spell attack roll and spell DC. The spell also
gains the appropriate trait for your tradition (arcane,
divine, occult, or primal).
Any physical material components and costs are
provided when a scroll is created, so you don’t need to
provide them when Casting a Spell from a scroll. You
must replace any required material component for that
spell with a somatic component. If the spell requires a
focus, you must have that focus to Cast the Spell from
a scroll.
Scroll Statistics
All scrolls have the same base statistics unless noted
otherwise. A scroll has light Bulk, and it must be held in
one hand to be activated.
Core Rulebook
564
Varying Statistics
Table 11–3 indicates the item level and Price of a
scroll, both of which are based on the level of the spell
contained on the scroll. Any costs to Cast the Spell are
added to the scroll’s Price when the scroll is crafted, so
a scroll containing a spell with a Cost entry will have a
higher Price than what appears on the table. The scroll’s
rarity matches the spell’s rarity.
The traits for a scroll vary based on the spell it contains.
A scroll always has the consumable, magical, and scroll
traits, plus the traits of the spell stored on it.
TABLE 11–3: SCROLL STATISTICS
Spell Level Item Level Scroll Price
1 1 4 gp
2 3 12 gp
3 5 30 gp
4 7 70 gp
5 9 150 gp
6 11 300 gp
7 13 600 gp
8 15 1,300 gp
9 17 3,000 gp
10 19 8,000 gp
Crafting a Scroll
The process to Craft a scroll is much like that to Craft any
other magic item. When you begin the crafting process,
choose a spell to put into the
scroll. You have to either Cast
that Spell during the crafting
process, or someone else must
do so in your presence. Casting
that Spell doesn’t produce its normal
effects; instead, the magic is trapped
inside the scroll. The casting must come
from a spellcaster expending a spell slot.
You can’t Craft a scroll from a spell
produced from another magic item, for
example. The caster has to provide any
cost of the spell.
Like other consumables, scrolls can be crafted
in batches of four. All scrolls of one batch must
contain the same spell at the same level, and you
must provide one casting for each scroll crafted.
Sample Scrolls
A wide variety of spells can appear on scrolls. The
following specific scrolls are just examples.
SCROLL OF GLITTERDUST ITEM 3
CONSUMABLE EVOCATION MAGICAL SCROLL
Price 12 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate[two-actions] Cast a Spell
This scroll can be used to cast glitterdust as a 2nd-level spell.
Craft Requirements Supply one casting of glitterdust.
SCROLL OF ILLUSORY DISGUISE ITEM 1
CONSUMABLE ILLUSION MAGICAL SCROLL
Price 3 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate[two-actions] Cast a Spell
This scroll can cast illusory disguise as a 1st-level spell.
Craft Requirements Supply one casting of illusory disguise.
Talismans
An item with the talisman trait is a magical charm, gem,
stone, or other small object affixed to armor, a shield, or
a weapon (called the affixed item). Each talisman holds a
sliver of combat knowledge or magical energy that can be
unleashed for a momentary boost of power or enhanced
ability. Many talismans can be activated as a free action
when you use a particular action or activity. A talisman is
a consumable item and has the talisman trait.
You must be wielding or wearing an item to activate a
talisman attached to it. Once activated, a talisman burns
out permanently, usually crumbling into a fine dust.
Affixing a Talisman
Each talisman’s stat block indicates the type of item it
can be affixed to. Affixing or removing requires using
the Affix a Talisman activity. A single talisman can be
affixed to only one item at a time, and an
item can have only one talisman affixed to
it at a time.
AFFIX A TALISMAN
EXPLORATION MANIPULATE
Requirements You must use a repair kit (page
291).
You spend 10 minutes affixing a talisman to an
item, placing the item on a stable surface and
using the repair kit with both hands. You can
also use this activity to remove a talisman. If
more than one talisman is affixed to an item,
the talismans are suppressed; none of them
can be activated.
Talismans
These are but a few of the talismans available.
BLOODSEEKER BEAK ITEM 4
CONSUMABLE MAGICAL NECROMANCY TALISMAN
Price 20 gp
Usage affixed to a weapon; Bulk —
Activate [free-action] envision; Trigger You hit a flat-footed creature
with the affixed weapon.
This long, hollow proboscis is harvested from the notorious
bloodseeker beast and drips a trickle of blood. When you
activate the beak, you deal an extra 1d4 precision damage
565
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
on your damage roll. If you deal sneak attack damage to the
creature, you also deal 1d4 persistent bleed damage.
BRONZE BULL PENDANT ITEM 2
CONSUMABLE EVOCATION MAGICAL TALISMAN
Price 7 gp
Usage affixed to armor; Bulk —
Activate [free-action] envision; Trigger You attempt an Athletics check
to Shove, but you haven’t rolled yet; Requirements You are
trained in Athletics.
This pendant is forged from grainy steel and depicts a snorting
bull’s face. The pendant must be attached to the chest area or
on a shoulder guard. When you activate the pendant, you gain
a +2 status bonus to the Athletics check to Shove, and if you
roll a critical failure on the check, you get a failure instead.
CRYING ANGEL PENDANT ITEM 2
CONSUMABLE DIVINE NECROMANCY TALISMAN
Price 7 gp
Usage affixed to armor; Bulk —
Activate [free-action] envision; Trigger You critically fail to Administer
First Aid; Requirements You are trained in Medicine.
When you activate this alabaster pendant, your critical failure
becomes a normal failure instead.
DAZING COIL ITEM 14
CONSUMABLE ENCHANTMENT MAGICAL TALISMAN
Price 900 gp
Usage affixed to a weapon; Bulk —
Activate [free-action] envision; Trigger You deal damage to a flat-footed
creature with the affixed weapon.
This knot of copper wire reshapes itself in a new pattern
every time its affixed weapon deals damage. When you
activate the coil, the damaged creature must succeed at a DC
31 Will save or be stunned 1. If it critically fails, it instead
becomes stunned 2.
DISPELLING SLIVER ITEM 17
ABJURATION CONSUMABLE MAGICAL TALISMAN
Price 2,400 gp
Usage affixed to a weapon; Bulk —
Activate [free-action] envision; Trigger Your Strike damages a target;
Requirements You’re a master with the affixed weapon.
Made from a treated sliver of cold iron, this talisman allows you
to counteract magical effects. When you activate the dispelling
sliver, it attempts to counteract a single spell active on the
target, with the effects of an 8th-level dispel magic spell.
If you activate the talisman on a successful Dispelling Slice,
the talisman attempts to counteract all spells active on the target.
DRAGON TURTLE SCALE ITEM 4
CONSUMABLE MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION TALISMAN
Price 13 gp
Usage affixed to armor; Bulk —
Activate [one-action] envision; Requirements You’re an expert in Athletics.
This shimmering green scale is usually attached to a golden
clasp or chain. When you activate the scale, for 1 minute you
gain a swim Speed equal to half your land Speed.
EFFERVESCENT AMPOULE ITEM 2
CONSUMABLE MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION TALISMAN
Price 7 gp
Usage affixed to armor; Bulk —
Activate[one-action] Interact; Requirements You’re an expert in Acrobatics.
Light spring water fizzes and bubbles within this small glass
globe, spilling onto the affixed armor when activated. Until the
end of your turn, the armor lets you move across water and
other liquids as if they were solid ground. If you Stride or Step
over a weight-sensitive pressure plate, you don’t cause the plate
to depress, which prevents you from triggering any device or
hazard attached to the pressure plate. When the ampoule’s
effect ends, you sink, fall, break through flimsy ground, or land
on pressure plates as normal for your current location.
EMERALD GRASSHOPPER ITEM 5
CONSUMABLE MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION TALISMAN
Price 30 gp
Usage affixed to armor; Bulk —
Activate [free-action] envision; Trigger You attempt a High Jump but
haven’t rolled yet; Requirements You are an expert in Athletics.
This metal grasshopper studded with emeralds is usually
clasped to the legs of a suit of armor. When you activate it,
if you succeed at the Athletics check, you Leap up to 50 feet
vertically and up to 10 feet horizontally. If you critically succeed,
you can Leap up to 75 feet vertically and 20 feet horizontally. If
you don’t end your jump on solid ground, you flutter in the air
until the end of your turn, then fall harmlessly at a rate of 60
feet per round until you reach the ground.
EYE OF APPREHENSION ITEM 12
CONSUMABLE DIVINATION FORTUNE TALISMAN
Price 400 gp
Usage affixed to armor; Bulk —
Activate [free-action] envision; Trigger You are about to roll Perception
for initiative but haven’t rolled yet; Requirements You are a
master in Perception.
This round piece of cymophane’s silky inclusion makes it look
like a cat’s eye. While affixed, it makes you jittery. When you
activate it, roll Perception twice and use the higher result.
FADE BAND ITEM 12
CONSUMABLE ILLUSION MAGICAL TALISMAN
Price 320 gp
Usage affixed to armor; Bulk —
Activate [free-action] envision; Trigger An attack misses you;
Requirements You are a master in Stealth.
This thin, silvery wire wraps around your armor. When you
activate the band, it casts a 2nd-level invisibility spell on you.
FEAR GEM ITEM 4
CONSUMABLE ENCHANTMENT FEAR MAGICAL MENTAL TALISMAN
Price 20 gp
Core Rulebook
566
Usage affixed to a weapon; Bulk —
Activate[two-actions] Intimidating Strike
Dark smoke seems to writhe within this obsidian gem. When
you activate the gem, you make an Intimidating Strike, as
the fighter feat (page 146).
If you have the Intimidating Strike feat, increase the
frightened condition value from this Intimidating Strike to
frightened 2, or frightened 3 on a critical hit.
FEATHER STEP STONE ITEM 3
CONSUMABLE MAGICAL TALISMAN TRANSMUTATION
Price 8 gp
Usage affixed to armor; Bulk —
Activate [free-action] envision; Trigger You Stride or Step; Requirement
You are an expert in Acrobatics.
This stone, usually shaped as a cabochon, is a small chunk of
amber with a bit of feather or a flying insect caught within it.
When you activate the stone, you ignore the effects of any
difficult terrain and greater difficult terrain you move through
until the end of your turn.
FLAME NAVETTE ITEM 16
ABJURATION CONSUMABLE MAGICAL TALISMAN
Price 1,800 gp
Usage affixed to armor; Bulk —
Activate [one-action] envision; Requirement You’re an expert in Will saves.
This piece of bronzite is shaped like an oval with points at both
ends. It has a carved flame at its center and is traditionally
worn over the heart. You can activate only one flame navette
per day. When you activate the navette, you gain the benefit
of the fighter’s Determination class feat, with a counteract
modifier of +22. If you have the Determination feat, you can
use your own modifier if it’s better.
GALLOWS TOOTH ITEM 8
CONSUMABLE DIVINATION MAGICAL TALISMAN
Price 100 gp
Usage affixed to a weapon; Bulk —
Activate [free-action] Interact; Trigger You attack an
adjacent creature and haven’t rolled your
attack roll; Requirements You’re a master
in Intimidation.
This grisly molar hangs from a cord
threaded through a tiny hole just above
its dried, exposed root. When you
activate this talisman, the creature
you’re attacking becomes flat-footed
until the end of the current turn.
GHOST DUST ITEM 16
CONSUMABLE ILLUSION OCCULT TALISMAN
Price 1,800 gp
Usage affixed to armor; Bulk —
Activate [free-action] envision; Trigger You use an action with the move
trait; Requirements You are legendary in Stealth.
This small vial is filled with a grayish-green dust rendered from
dried ectoplasm. When you activate the dust, it casts a 4th-level
invisibility spell on you. This comes into effect before you move
during the triggering action.
GRIM TROPHY ITEM 7
CONSUMABLE ENCHANTMENT MAGICAL TALISMAN
Price 55 gp
Usage affixed to armor; Bulk —
Activate [free-action] envision; Trigger You attempt an Intimidation
check to Coerce or Demoralize, but you haven’t rolled yet;
Requirements You are an expert in Intimidation.
This talisman comes in many forms, most often a severed
piece of a humanoid creature displayed in some gruesome
manner. When you activate the trophy, select two targets and
compare your Intimidation check result to both of their DCs.
HUNTER’S BANE ITEM 2
CONSUMABLE DIVINATION MAGICAL TALISMAN
Price 6 gp
Usage affixed to armor; Bulk —
Activate [free-action] envision; Trigger An undetected enemy hits you
with an attack; Requirements You are trained in Survival.
This talisman is a ring of dried, interwoven leaves. When you
activate the hunter’s bane, you sense the exact location of the
attacker, making it hidden from you instead of undetected. If
the attacker is behind lead, the hunter’s bane fails and is wasted.
IRON CUBE ITEM 6
CONSUMABLE EVOCATION MAGICAL TALISMAN
Price 50 gp
Usage affixed to a weapon; Bulk —
Activate [two-actions] Knockdown; Requirement You are an expert
with the affixed weapon.
This cube of blackened iron is affixed to a weapon with an iron
chain. When you activate the cube, you use Knockdown, as the
fighter feat (page 146).
If you have the Knockdown feat, ignore its normal
size restrictions.
IRON CUDGEL ITEM 14
CONSUMABLE EVOCATION MAGICAL TALISMAN
Price 900 gp
Usage affixed to a weapon; Bulk —
Activate [one-action] Brutal Finish; Requirement
You are a master with the affixed weapon.
This miniature iron cudgel is typically affixed
to a weapon by an iron chain. When you activate
the cudgel, you use Brutal Finish, as the fighter feat
(page 151). You must meet the normal requirements,
including those of the press trait.
If you have the Brutal Finish feat, add two additional
weapon damage dice on a success or a failure.
IRON EQUALIZER ITEM 12
CONSUMABLE EVOCATION MAGICAL TALISMAN
Price 400 gp
567
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Usage affixed to a weapon; Bulk —
Activate [one-action] Certain Strike; Requirement You are a master
with the affixed weapon.
This small iron band has a shifting weight that helps equalize
the affixed weapon’s balance. When you activate it, you use
Certain Strike, as the fighter feat (page 150). You must meet
the normal requirements, including those of the press trait.
If you have the Certain Strike feat, the failure effect
increases to deal the weapon’s normal damage.
IRON MEDALLION ITEM 10
ABJURATION CONSUMABLE MAGICAL TALISMAN
Price 175 gp
Usage affixed to armor; Bulk —
Activate [free-action] envision; Trigger You attempt a
Will save against a fear effect but haven’t
rolled yet; Requirements You have master
proficiency in Will saves or have the bravery
class feature.
This small medallion is shaped like a shield.
When you activate it, you gain a +2 status bonus
to saves against fear for 1 minute. On the triggering
save, if the outcome of your roll is a failure, you get
a success instead or if the outcome is a critical failure,
you get a failure instead.
JADE BAUBLE ITEM 8
CONSUMABLE ENCHANTMENT MAGICAL MENTAL TALISMAN
Price 100 gp
Usage affixed to a melee weapon; Bulk —
Activate [one-action] command; Requirements You are a
master with the affixed weapon.
This bit of jade is usually carved in the shape of
a duelist, or sometimes a multi-armed creature.
When you activate the bauble, it magically draws the
attention of foes. Until the start of your next turn,
enemies within the reach of the weapon the talisman
is affixed to are flat-footed.
JADE CAT ITEM 2
ABJURATION CONSUMABLE MAGICAL TALISMAN
Price 6 gp
Usage affixed to armor; Bulk —
Activate [free-action] command; Trigger You fall or attempt
an Acrobatics check to Balance; Requirements
You are trained in Acrobatics.
A thumb-sized feline carved of rare stone, the jade cat
is typically worn as a pendant upon a suit of armor. For 1
minute after you activate the cat, you treat all falls as 20 feet
shorter, you are not flat-footed when you Balance, and narrow
surfaces and uneven ground are not difficult terrain for you.
MENDING LATTICE ITEM 13
UNCOMMON ABJURATION CONSUMABLE MAGICAL TALISMAN
Price 525 gp
Usage affixed to a shield or weapon; Bulk —
Activate [free-action] command; Trigger The affixed item would take
damage; Requirements You are a master in Crafting.
This lattice of reinforced iron is shaped into a perfect
octagon. When you activate it, it negates the damage and
instantly and completely repairs the affixed item.
MESMERIZING OPAL ITEM 2
CONSUMABLE ENCHANTMENT MAGICAL TALISMAN
Price 7 gp
Usage affixed to armor; Bulk —
Activate [free-action] envision; Trigger You attempt a Deception check
to Feint, but you haven’t rolled yet.
This silver-bound opal pendant is afire with iridescence.
When you activate it, if the outcome of your
triggering Deception check is a critical failure,
you get a failure instead (or if the outcome is a
success, you get a critical success instead).
MONKEY PIN ITEM 2
CONSUMABLE TRANSMUTATION MAGICAL TALISMAN
Price 6 gp
Usage affixed to armor; Bulk —
Activate [one-action] Climb; Requirements You are trained in
Athletics.
This small brass pin is in the shape of a monkey climbing
a tree. When you activate this talisman, use a Climb action.
If you succeed, you move your full Speed during the Climb. If
you roll a critical failure, you get a failure instead.
MUMMIFIED BAT ITEM 10
CONSUMABLE DIVINATION MAGICAL TALISMAN
Price 175 gp
Usage affixed to a weapon; Bulk —
Activate [one-action] command; Requirements You are a master
in Perception.
This talisman is the magically treated corpse of a tiny
bat bound in papyrus. When you activate the bat,
the affixed weapon detects vibrations around you
and guides your perception. You gain the benefits
of the fighter Blind-Fight class feat (page 149) for
1 minute.
If you have the Blind-Fight feat, you gain
imprecise echolocation with a range of 30 feet
for 1 minute. This makes creatures that would
be undetected by you because you can’t see them
hidden instead.
MURDERER’S KNOT ITEM 7
CONSUMABLE EVOCATION MAGICAL TALISMAN
Price 66 gp
Usage affixed to a weapon; Bulk —
Activate[free-action] command; Trigger You damage a flat-footed creature
with a Strike using the affixed weapon; Requirements You
are an expert with the affixed weapon.
This black strand of leather is tied to look like a peace knot
when the weapon is stowed, but it doesn’t hamper drawing
Core Rulebook
568
the weapon. When you activate the knot, the creature you
damaged takes 1d6 persistent bleed damage.
If you have the Twist the Knife feat, the talisman instead deals
persistent bleed damage equal to your sneak attack damage.
ONYX PANTHER ITEM 2
CONSUMABLE MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION TALISMAN
Price 7 gp
Usage affixed to armor; Bulk —
Activate [free-action] envision; Trigger You use a Sneak action;
Requirements You are trained in Stealth.
This small stone is a stylized panther shape. When you activate
it, you can move your full Speed (instead of half) during the
triggering Sneak and any other time you Sneak this turn.
OWLBEAR CLAW ITEM 1
CONSUMABLE EVOCATION MAGICAL TALISMAN
Price 3 gp
Usage affixed to a weapon; Bulk —
Activate [free-action] envision; Trigger You critically succeed at an
attack roll with the affixed weapon.
This claw set in an iron clasp and chain isn’t always the claw of
an owlbear. When you activate the claw, the triggering attack
gains the weapon’s critical specialization effect.
POTENCY CRYSTAL ITEM 1
CONSUMABLE EVOCATION MAGICAL TALISMAN
Price 4 gp
Usage affixed to a weapon; Bulk —
Activate [free-action] envision; Trigger You make an attack with the
affixed weapon, but you haven’t rolled yet.
This fluorite crystal glows with a strange phosphorescence.
When you activate the crystal, the weapon becomes a +1
striking weapon for the rest of the turn, gaining a +1 item
bonus to the attack roll and increasing the damage on a hit to
two weapon damage dice.
SAVIOR SPIKE ITEM 2
ABJURATION CONSUMABLE FORCE MAGICAL TALISMAN
Price 7 gp
Usage affixed to armor; Bulk —
Activate [free-action] command; Trigger You attempt to Grab an Edge
but haven’t rolled; Requirements You’re an expert in Reflex.
This pyramid-shaped spike is attached to an armor’s chest
piece. When you activate the spike, it shoots a strand of
force to help you gain purchase. If you roll a success on the
triggering attempt, you get a critical success instead (if you
roll a critical failure, you get a failure instead).
SHARK TOOTH CHARM ITEM 5
ABJURATION CONSUMABLE MAGICAL TALISMAN
Price 23 gp
Usage affixed to armor; Bulk —
Activate [free-action] command; Trigger You attempt to Escape
using Acrobatics for your roll, but you haven’t rolled yet;
Requirements You are an expert in Acrobatics.
This dried seaweed bracelet is lined with charms shaped like
small shark teeth. When you activate the bracelet, if you roll
a success on the triggering check, you get a critical success
instead (if you roll a critical failure, you get a failure instead). If
you fail the Acrobatics check against a grabbing creature, the
creature must either release you as a free action or take 2d8
piercing damage as shark’s teeth momentarily emerge from
your skin.
SNEAKY KEY ITEM 5
CONSUMABLE EVOCATION MAGICAL TALISMAN
Price 22 gp
Usage affixed to armor; Bulk —
Activate[one-action] Interact; Requirements You are an expert in Thievery.
This small silver skeleton key can be pinned to armor or
a sleeve. When you turn the key to activate it, for the next
minute, if the outcome of any your attempts to Pick a Lock is
a critical failure, you get a failure instead.
SWIFT BLOCK CABOCHON ITEM 7
UNCOMMON ABJURATION CONSUMABLE MAGICAL TALISMAN
Price 70 gp
Usage affixed to a shield; Bulk —
Activate [free-action] envision; Trigger You take damage from a physical
attack while you don’t have the affixed shield raised.
This clear quartz cabochon attaches to the center of your
shield. When you activate the cabochon, you use the Shield
Block reaction even if you hadn’t raised the affixed shield (and
even if you don’t normally have that reaction).
TIGER MENUKI ITEM 5
CONSUMABLE MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION TALISMAN
Price 30 gp
Usage affixed to a weapon; Bulk —
Activate [free-action] envision; Trigger You Strike with the affixed weapon.
This tiger formed of pewter snarls viciously from your
weapon’s grip. When you activate the tiger, the affixed
weapon gains the sweep trait for the triggering attack and all
other attacks for 1 minute.
VANISHING COIN ITEM 10
CONSUMABLE ILLUSION MAGICAL TALISMAN
Price 160 gp
Usage affixed to armor; Bulk —
Activate [free-action] envision; Trigger You attempt a Stealth check for
initiative, but you haven’t rolled yet; Requirements You are
a master in Stealth.
This copper coin dangles from a leather strip strung through
a hole drilled in the center. Until activated, the coin becomes
invisible for a few seconds at random intervals every few
minutes. When you activate the coin, it casts a 2nd-level
invisibility spell on you, lasting until the end of your next turn.
VIPER’S FANG ITEM 14
CONSUMABLE EVOCATION MAGICAL TALISMAN
Price 850 gp
569
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Usage affixed to a weapon; Bulk —
Activate [reaction] envision; Trigger A creature within your reach
uses a manipulate or move action, makes a ranged attack, or
leaves a square during a move action it’s using; Requirements
You are a master with the affixed weapon.
When you activate this resin-strengthened viper skull, you
make an Attack of Opportunity against the triggering creature.
If you have Attack of Opportunity, you can activate the
viper’s fang as a free action.
WOLF FANG ITEM 1
CONSUMABLE EVOCATION MAGICAL TALISMAN
Price 4 gp
Usage affixed to armor; Bulk —
Activate [free-action] envision; Trigger
You successfully Trip a foe;
Requirements You are trained in Athletics.
This wolf canine is bound in a strip of leather and
tied to a buckle or strap of a suit of armor. When you
activate the fang, you deal bludgeoning damage equal to
your Strength modifier to the target of your Trip. If your
Trip would already deal physical damage that doesn’t
include an ability modifier, add your Strength modifier to
that damage.
Other Consumables
Though many consumables are grouped into
specific categories, such as potions and talismans, some
consumables don’t fit into those categories.
CANDLE OF TRUTH ITEM 8
UNCOMMON CONSUMABLE ENCHANTMENT MAGICAL MENTAL
Price 75 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk —
Activate [one-action] Interact
This tapered candle has a golden wick that burns with white fire.
You activate the candle by lighting it, which causes creatures
within 10 feet of the candle to find it difficult to tell falsehoods.
Creatures in the area receive a –4 status penalty to Lie.
In addition, when first entering the affected area, each
creature (including you) must succeed at a DC 26 Will save or
be unable to tell any deliberate lies while within 10 feet of the
lit candle. This lasts for as long as the candle is lit. Once lit, the
candle burns for 10 minutes, and it cannot be extinguished.
DUST OF APPEARANCE ITEM 6
CONSUMABLE DIVINATION MAGICAL
Price 50 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk —
Activate [one-action] Interact
Stored in a small reed, this powder looks like a fine metallic
dust. When you fling it in the air, it coats all creatures in a
10-foot burst centered on a point within 5 feet of you. For 1
minute, the coated creatures can’t be concealed or invisible,
nor can they benefit from mirror image or similar abilities
that create illusory duplicates. Any illusions in the area of
3rd level or lower are revealed as such, although this does
not end their effect.
DUST OF DISAPPEARANCE ITEM 9
CONSUMABLE ILLUSION MAGICAL
Price 135 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk —
Activate [one-action] Interact
This powder shimmers like a thousand tiny motes of light.
Activating the dust by sprinkling it on yourself or a creature
within reach casts a 4th-level invisibility spell with a
duration of 1 minute on that creature. This invisibility can’t
be negated or seen through by any spell of 3rd level or
lower or any item of 5th level or lower.
ELEMENTAL GEM ITEM 10
CONJURATION CONSUMABLE MAGICAL
Price 200 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk —
Activate[two-actions] command, Interact
You shout the name of an elemental lord and
dash this glassy gem against a hard surface
to activate it. It cracks open, casting a 5th-level
summon elemental spell to summon forth an
elemental you control as long as you spend an action
each round to Sustain the Activation.
This gem comes in four varieties: transparent for a living
whirlwind, light brown for a living landslide, reddish orange
for a living wildfire, and blue-green for a living waterfall.
FEATHER TOKEN ITEM 1+
CONJURATION CONSUMABLE MAGICAL
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk —
Activate [one-action] Interact
Each feather token appears to be a simple feather from some
exotic bird. The feather’s shaft, dipped in gold, bears a single
arcane rune. Activating a feather token causes it to transform
into another object, which then can be used as normal for that
object. Each feather can be activated only once, with most of
them permanently becoming the item in their description.
Type anchor; Level 7; Price 55 gp
This feather can be activated only on a boat. When activated,
this feather transforms into a massive anchor that causes the
boat to immediately stop. After 1 day, the anchor vanishes and
the boat can move as normal. The anchor is attached to the
boat by a magical chain of force, but the chain can be removed
by dispel magic or destroyed (Hardness 30, HP 40).
Type bird; Level 3; Price 8 gp
When activated, this token transforms into a small sparrow that
waits on your finger for you to relay a message up to 1 minute in
length, along with the name and rough location of a recipient.
The recipient must be someone you have met, and the location
must be somewhere you have visited. After receiving the
message, the bird flies off to deliver it, traveling at 30 miles
per hour and then searching for the target in the location you
provided. If the bird finds the target, it moves adjacent to them,
Core Rulebook
570
your words emanate from the bird, and the bird then flies off
and vanishes. The bird also vanishes if it fails to find your target
after 10 hours of searching the location you specified.
Type chest; Level 3; Price 10 gp
When you use this token, a small wooden chest appears and
immediately opens. This chest can hold up to 10 Bulk worth
of items. Once the chest is closed, it transforms again—this
time into a key—taking all of the stored items with it. You can
activate this key by spending an Interact action to turn it in an
imaginary lock, which causes it to transform back into a chest
with all of the items still inside. Once it has turned into a chest
a second time, it forever remains a wooden chest.
Type fan; Level 4; Price 15 gp
Activating this feather requires you to fan it in a given direction.
If this direction is toward the sail of a vessel, the feather flutters
up toward the sail and fans continuously, filling the sail with air
and granting the vessel a +10-foot circumstance bonus to its
Speed for 8 hours. If fanned in any other direction, it instead
produces a single casting of gust of wind (DC 20).
Type holly bush; Level 2; Price 6 gp
When this feather is activated, it immediately transforms into a
living holly bush, filling a single square. This bush can provide
standard cover. In addition, the bush has 2d4 bright-red berries.
While holly berries are usually poisonous, these berries are
infused with beneficial magic. You can pick and eat a berry as an
Interact action to recover 1 Hit Point. Once plucked from the bush,
a berry becomes non-magical after a few seconds, so it doesn’t
heal you if you don’t eat it within the span of your Interact action.
If activated on soil, the plant continues to grow and thrive
(although it doesn’t produce any more healing berries). If
activated elsewhere, it withers and dies within 1d4 days.
Type ladder; Level 1; Price 3 gp
When activated, this feather transforms
permanently into a 20-foot-long wooden ladder.
Type swan boat; Level 8; Price 76 gp
This feather can be activated only when tossed
into a large body of water, such as a lake or
broad river. It transforms into a swan-shaped
boat capable of carrying up to 32 Medium
creatures, 8 Large creatures, or 2 Huge
creatures. The boat moves on the water at a
Speed of 50 feet, and lasts 1 day.
Type tree; Level 6; Price 38 gp
This token can be activated only on an unoccupied
patch of earth or soil. When activated, this token transforms
into an oak tree, 60 feet tall with a 5-foot-wide trunk. The tree
continues to live and grow if conditions are favorable.
Type whip; Level 9; Price 130 gp
This feather transforms into a +1 striking dancing whip when
activated. The whip immediately jumps from your grasp and
proceeds to attack your enemies until 1 minute has passed or
it fails its flat check for dancing, at which point it vanishes.
If the whip’s target isn’t prone, the whip uses its actions to
attempt to Trip that creature instead of making a Strike. The
whip’s total attack modifier for Striking or Tripping is +18
instead of the normal bonus for a dancing weapon.
HOLY WATER ITEM 1
CONSUMABLE DIVINE GOOD SPLASH
Price 3 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Strike
This vial contains water blessed by a good deity. You activate
a vial of holy water by throwing it as a Strike. It’s a simple
thrown weapon with a range increment of 20 feet. Unlike an
alchemical bomb, it doesn’t add the manipulate trait to the
attack made with it.
Holy water deals 1d6 good damage and 1  good splash
damage. It damages only fiends, undead, and creatures that
have a weakness to good damage.
JAVELIN OF LIGHTNING ITEM 9
CONSUMABLE ELECTRICITY EVOCATION MAGICAL
Price 110 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate[two-actions] command, Interact
This item looks like a normal javelin carved with lightning-bolt
motifs. If thrown without being activated, it wobbles in the
air and fails to strike true. When you Activate the javelin, your
command makes the carvings crackle with electricity. You then
hurl the javelin. It shatters immediately after leaving your hand
and unleashes its magic as a 4th-level lightning bolt originating
from your space. The bolt deals 5d12 electricity damage and
has a Reflex save DC of 25.
Craft Requirements Supply a casting of lightning bolt (4th level).
RUNESTONE ITEM 1
CONSUMABLE MAGICAL
Price 3 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
This flat piece of hard stone is specially prepared for etching a
magical fundamental rune or property rune. You can
etch only one rune upon a stone. Once the stone is
etched, it gains the magic school trait of the rune
etched upon it. When a rune is transferred from
the runestone to another object, the runestone
cracks and is destroyed. The Price listed is for an
empty stone; a stone holding a rune adds the Price
of the rune.
UNHOLY WATER ITEM 1
CONSUMABLE DIVINE EVIL SPLASH
Price 3 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Strike
An evil deity’s malice lies within this vial of water. You activate
a vial of unholy water by throwing it as a Strike. It’s a simple
thrown weapon with a range increment of 20 feet. Unlike an
alchemical bomb, it doesn’t add the manipulate trait to the
attack made with it.
Unholy water deals 1d6 evil damage and 1 evil splash damage.
It damages only celestials and creatures that have a weakness
to evil damage.
571
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Held Items
These items need to be held to use them. Weapons, wands,
and staves follow special rules and have their own sections.
BAG OF HOLDING ITEM 4+
CONJURATION EXTRADIMENSIONAL MAGICAL
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk 1
Though it appears to be a cloth sack decorated with panels
of richly colored silk or stylish embroidery, a bag of holding
opens into an extradimensional space larger than its outside
dimensions. The Bulk held inside the bag doesn’t change the
Bulk of the bag of holding itself. The amount of Bulk the bag’s
extradimensional space can hold depends on its type.
You can Interact with the bag of holding to put items in or
remove them just like a mundane sack. Though the bag can
hold a great amount of material, an object still needs to be able
to fit through the opening of the sack to be stored inside.
If the bag is overloaded or broken, it ruptures and is
ruined, causing the items inside to be lost forever. If it’s
turned inside out, the items inside spill out unharmed,
but the bag must be put right before
it can be used again. A living creature
placed inside the bag has enough air for
10 minutes before it begins to suffocate,
and it can attempt to Escape against a DC of 13. An
item inside the bag provides no benefits unless it’s
retrieved first. An item in the bag can’t be detected
by magic that detects only things on the same plane.
Type I; Level 4; Price 75 gp; Capacity 25 Bulk
Type II; Level 7; Price 300 gp; Capacity 50 Bulk
Type III; Level 11; Price 1,200 gp; Capacity 100 Bulk
Type IV; Level 13; Price 2,400 gp; Capacity 150 Bulk
BOTTLED AIR ITEM 7
AIR CONJURATION MAGICAL
Price 320 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Appearing to be an ordinary corked glass
bottle, this item contains a limitless supply of
fresh air. You must uncork the bottle with an
Interact action before you can activate it.
Activate [one-action] Interact; Effect You draw a
breath of air from the bottle. This allows you to
breathe even in an airless or toxic environment. Air doesn’t
escape the mouth of the bottle, so leaving the open bottle in
an airless environment doesn’t change the environment.
BROOM OF FLYING ITEM 12
MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 1,900 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
This broom has a tenuous connection to gravity, and it tends to
drift even while stowed. You can ride on the broom using one
hand to guide it, and the broom can carry up to one passenger
in addition to you. The broom moves at a fly Speed of 20 feet.
The broom can carry only so much, taking a –10-foot penalty
to its Speed if laden with more than 20 Bulk, and crashing to
the ground if it carries more than 30 Bulk.
Activate [two-actions] command, Interact; Effect You name
a destination on the same plane, and the broom
speeds toward it at a fly Speed of 40 feet. You must
either clutch the broom with two hands in order to
ride it, or you need to release the broom to send it
off with no rider. If you don’t have a good idea of the
location, layout, and general direction of the destination,
or if your named destination is on another plane, the
broom wanders aimlessly, circling back to its starting
location after 30 minutes.
If the broom carries a rider, this activation lasts until
4 hours pass (typically 16 miles of travel), the broom
reaches its destination, or you Dismiss the activation.
If the broom doesn’t have a rider, the activation lasts
until the broom reaches its destination. When the
activation ends, the broom floats to the ground and
can’t be activated again for 1 hour.
CHIME OF OPENING ITEM 6
UNCOMMON EVOCATION MAGICAL
Price 235 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
This hollow mithral tube is about a foot long and bears
engravings reminiscent of open locks and broken chains.
The chime can be activated 10 times before it cracks and
becomes useless.
Activate [one-action] Interact; Effect You aim the chime at a
container, door, or lock you want to open and strike the
chime. The chime sends out magical vibrations that
attempt a Thievery check against the lock’s DC, with
a Thievery bonus of +13. This targets only one lock
or binding at a time, so you might need to activate
the chime multiple times to open a target with
several forms of protection.
CRYSTAL BALL ITEM 14+
UNCOMMON DIVINATION MAGICAL SCRYING
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
This polished crystal sphere enhances scrying magic. Any
visual information received through a spell with the scrying
trait that was cast by the crystal ball appears within the
sphere, and any auditory information sounds out from the
surface of the sphere. When you cast a scrying spell by any
other means while holding the sphere, you can relay any
information you receive in the same way, allowing others to
see or hear the target.
The base version of a crystal ball is a sphere of clear quartz,
but other versions are made of different stones.
Activate 1 minute (command, envision, Interact); Frequency
once per hour; Effect The crystal ball casts clairvoyance to
your specifications.
Activate 10 minutes (command, envision, Interact);
Frequency twice per day; Effect The crystal ball casts a DC 33
scrying spell to your specifications.
Core Rulebook
572
Type clear quartz; Level 14; Price 3,800 gp
Type selenite; Level 15; Price 7,000 gp
Scrying is DC 36 and gives you the benefits of see invisibility
on the target.
Type moonstone; Level 16; Price 7,500 gp
Scrying is DC 37 and gives you the benefits of mind reading
on the target, using the same save DC.
Type peridot; Level 17; Price 12,500 gp
Scrying is DC 39 and gives you the benefits of
telepathy for communicating with the target.
Type obsidian; Level 19; Price 32,000 gp
Scrying is DC 41 and gives you the benefits of
true seeing for anything you watch through it.
DECANTER OF ENDLESS WATER ITEM 7
CONJURATION MAGICAL WATER
Price 320; Bulk L
This item looks like an ordinary glass flask full of water.
The stopper can’t be removed unless you speak one of
the item’s three command words, each of which causes
water to pour forth in a different way. Pulling the stopper
straight out creates fresh water, and rotating it as you pull
creates salt water. Any effect of the decanter lasts until the
decanter is plugged (with its own stopper, a finger, or the like).
Activate [one-action] command, Interact; Effect Speaking “stream,”
you cause water to pour out at a rate of 1 gallon per round.
Activate [one-action] command, Interact; Effect Speaking
“fountain,” you cause water to pour out in a 5-foot-long
stream at a rate of 5 gallons per round.
Activate [one-action] command, Interact; Effect Speaking “geyser,”
you cause a powerful deluge of water to erupt at a rate
of 15 gallons per round. You can direct the stream at a
creature, subjecting it to the effects of hydraulic
push (spell attack roll +15). You can repeat this
once per round as long as the geyser continues,
spending an Interact action to direct the geyser
each time.
EVERBURNING TORCH ITEM 1
EVOCATION LIGHT MAGICAL
Price 15 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
An everburning torch is one of the most common
applications of permanent magic. This torch sheds light
constantly, requiring no oxygen and generating no heat.
The flame can be covered or hidden, but can’t be smothered
or quenched.
HOLY PRAYER BEADS ITEM 5+
UNCOMMON DIVINE HEALING NECROMANCY POSITIVE
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk —
This strand of ordinary-looking prayer beads glows with a
soft light and becomes warm to the touch the first time you
cast a divine spell while holding it. When you do, the prayer
beads become attuned to your deity, changing their form
and iconography to prominently incorporate your deity’s
religious symbol and iconography. The beads don’t transform
or function for an evil spellcaster.
Whenever you cast a divine spell from your own spell slots
while holding the prayer beads, you recover 1 Hit Point; this
is a positive healing effect. If the spell you cast was a healing
spell, you can grant this additional healing to one of the
spell’s targets instead of yourself.
Activate Cast a Spell; Effect Cast bless or heal,
each once per day.
Type standard; Level 5; Price 160 gp
Type greater; Level 11; Price 1,400 gp
You recover 1d4 Hit Points instead of 1 Hit Point
when casting divine spells from your spell slots.
Change the beads’ list of spells to the 4th-level
versions of bless, divine wrath (matching one
component of your deity’s alignment), heal, neutralize
poison, and remove disease. You can cast each of these
once per day.
Craft Requirements You have a spellcasting class
feature with the divine tradition.
HORN OF BLASTING ITEM 9
EVOCATION SONIC
Price 700 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
A horn of blasting is a bright brass trumpet. It can
be played as an instrument, granting a +2 item
bonus to your Performance check.
Activate [one-action] Interact; Frequency once per round;
Effect When you activate the horn by blowing into it with
destructive intent, you create a blast note targeting
one creature or object within 30 feet. The blast deals
3d6 sonic damage. (DC 28 basic Fortitude save).
Activate [two-actions] Interact; Frequency once per
day; Effect You can blow even louder to create
an intense blast wave in a 30-foot cone that
deals 8d6 sonic damage. Each creature
attempts a DC 28 Fortitude save with
the following effects.
Critical Success The creature takes
no damage.
Success The creature takes half damage.
Failure The creature takes full damage and is deafened for
2d6 rounds.
HORN OF FOG ITEM 6
CONJURATION MAGICAL WATER
Price 230 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
This large ram’s horn perpetually glistens with tiny droplets of
water, much like condensation.
Activate[two-actions] Interact; Frequency once per hour; Effect You
activate the horn by blowing deeply into it, causing it to issue
forth a low blast and cast a 2nd-level obscuring mist spell. You
can Dismiss the mist at any time by blowing a second note on
the horn using an Interact action.
573
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
IMMOVABLE ROD ITEM 9
MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 600 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
This flat iron bar is almost completely nondescript, except for
one small button appearing on its surface.
Activate [one-action] Interact; You push the button to anchor the rod
in place. It doesn’t move, defying gravity if need be. If the
button is pushed again, the rod deactivates, ending
the anchoring magic. While anchored, the
rod can be moved only if 8,000 pounds of
pressure are applied to it or if a creature uses
Athletics to Force Open the rod with a DC of
40 (though most intelligent creatures can just
push the button to release the rod).
MAESTRO’S INSTRUMENT ITEM 3+
ENCHANTMENT MAGICAL
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk 1
A maestro’s instrument can be crafted in the form of
any variety of handheld musical instrument. A maestro’s
instrument grants you a +1 item bonus to Performance
checks while playing music with the instrument.
Activate [two-actions] Interact; Frequency once per day; Effect
You can play the instrument to produce the effects of a
charm spell.
Type lesser; Level 3; Price 60 gp
Type moderate; Level 10; Price 900 gp
The item bonus is +2, and the charm spell is 4th level.
Type greater; Level 18; Price 19,000 gp
The item bonus is +3, and the charm spell is 8th level.
Craft Requirements You must supply a casting of
charm of the appropriate level.
MARVELOUS MEDICINES ITEM 12+
MAGICAL NECROMANCY
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk 1
This set of healer’s tools contains a seemingly endless
supply of bandages, herbs, and healing items of impeccable
quality, granting you a +2 item bonus to Medicine checks.
Activate [one-action] Treat Poison or 8 hours (Treat Disease);
Effect You can activate the tools when you use them to
Treat Poison in order to produce the effects of neutralize
poison, or when you Treat Disease in order to produce the
effects of remove disease. Once these medicines have been
used to treat a patient’s poison or disease, they can’t be used
again to treat the same affliction for that patient.
Type standard; Level 12; Price 1,800 gp
Type greater; Level 18; Price 19,000 gp
The tools grant a +3 item bonus, and the spells are heightened
to 6th level.
POSSIBILITY TOME ITEM 18
MAGICAL DIVINATION
Price 22,000 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk 2
An array of semiprecious stones is set into the ornate silver
and beaten copper cover of this thick and weighty tome. If
you open the book before it’s been activated, its vellum pages
are blank and pristine, but once activated, words dance and
swim onto the pages before your eyes.
Activate 10 minutes (envision, Interact); Effect As you flip
through the book, you think about a broad topic you want
to know more about. Choose one skill: Arcana, Crafting,
Medicine, Nature, Occultism, Religion, Society, or a single
subcategory of Lore. The book’s pages fill with
information about that skill, though only you can
see the information. While the pages are full,
you can spend an Interact action perusing the
book just before attempting a check to Recall
Knowledge with the chosen skill. This grants
you a +3 item bonus to the check, and if you
roll a critical failure, you get a failure instead.
The information within the book disappears after
24 hours or when the tome is activated again.
PRIMEVAL MISTLETOE ITEM 6+
 PRIMAL TRANSMUTATION
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk —
This sprig of berry-festooned holly and mistletoe doesn’t wilt
or rot. It can be used as a primal focus, and it also grants the
creature holding it a +1 item bonus to Nature checks.
Activate [two-actions] Interact; Frequency once per 10 minutes;
Effect You squeeze juice from one of the berries and smear
it onto a non-magical club or staff to cast shillelagh upon it.
Activate [two-actions] Interact; Frequency once per day; Effect You
can twine the sprig around the wrist of one hand and touch
a tree to cast tree shape upon yourself, except instead of a
becoming a tree, you become a vine on the touched tree.
Type standard; Level 6; Price 230 gp
Type greater; Level 14; Price 3,900 gp
The sprig grants a +2 bonus and can be activated in one
additional way:
Activate[two-actions] Interact; Frequency once per day; Effect You
plant the primeval mistletoe into an area of natural
earth or stone. Once planted, the plant immediately
sprouts into an area of holly bushes that don’t impede
movement and that pulse with positive energy, replicating
the effects of a field of life spell. This lasts for up to 1 minute,
as long as you continue to Sustain the Activation. When this
magic ends, the holly bushes revert back into the original
primeval mistletoe.
ROD OF NEGATION ITEM 14
 ABJURATION MAGICAL
Price 4,300 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
This long, plain, leaden rod can disrupt magic.
Activate [two-actions] Interact; Effect This rod emits a thin, gray
beam that negates a spell or magic item, casting a 6th-level
dispel magic spell with a counteract modifier of +23. Once
activated, the rod can’t be activated again for 2d6 hours.
Core Rulebook
574
ROD OF WONDER ITEM 8
RARE CHAOTIC EVOCATION MAGICAL
Price 465 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
This peculiar rod is strange and unpredictable. Each time it is
activated, it produces one of a variety of effects at random.
Activate [two-actions] command, Interact; Effect Choose a creature
within 60 feet and roll d% on the table below to determine the
rod’s effect. If an entry lists only a spell name, the rod casts
that spell at its lowest level. You make any decisions for a
spell cast by the rod unless otherwise indicated, except that it
must target the creature you chose, or the creature you chose
must be the center of the spell’s area, if it has an area but no
targets. If the spell’s range is less than 60 feet, increase the
range to 60 feet.
Any spell DC required is DC 27, and any spell attack roll
required is +17. If the rod casts a spell on you, you don’t get a
saving throw or other defense against it.
Once activated, the rod can’t be activated again for 1d4 hours.
D% Wondrous Effect
1–3 Leaves grow from the target; they last 24 hours
4–8 Darkness
9 Summon a giant stag beetle (5th-level summon
animal; Pathfinder Bestiary 41)
10–13 A stream of 600 large and colorful
butterflies pours forth, fluttering in
a 20-foot burst for 2 rounds;
creatures are blinded while in the
cloud of butterflies
14–15 All the target’s weapons animate
with the effects of the dancing rune
16–25 Lightning bolt
26–29 Grass grows in a 60-foot cone in front
of the rod, or existing grass grows at
10 × normal rate
30 Target turns blue, green, or purple with an
unlimited duration
31 Summon an elephant (6th-level summon animal;
Pathfinder Bestiary 154)
32–34 Heavy rain falls in a 60-foot radius around you for
1 round
35–38 Stinking cloud
39 Summon an ineffective mouse (1st-level summon
animal)
40–42 Vibrant pattern, with a 1-round duration
43–44 The rod casts mirror image on you
45–46 Gust of wind
47–48 The non-living, unattended object closest to the
target (up to 30 cubic feet in size) turns ethereal for
an unlimited duration
49–53 Slow
54 You turn blue, green, or purple with an unlimited
duration
55–59 The rod casts pest form on you, lasting 1d4 rounds
60–61 1d4 × 10 gems, each worth 1 sp, shoot from the rod,
dealing 1 piercing damage to each creature in a
15-foot cone
62 Sleep, with a 100-foot burst
63–72 Fireball
73–77 Mind reading
78–80 Roll again; the target believes you created the
effect of the second roll
81–84 Enlarge
85–87 Target is coated in nectar, making it clumsy 1 for
1 round
88–92 Faerie fire
93–97 The rod casts invisibility on you
98–100 The rod casts shrink on you, lasting 1 day
SKELETON KEY ITEM 5+
MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk —
A grinning skull tops the bow of this macabre key. This key
can be used in place of thieves’ tools when attempting to Pick
a Lock, and it grants a +1 item bonus to the Thievery check.
If the skeleton key becomes broken due to a critical failure
on the check, it works as normal thieves’ tools and loses its
benefits until repaired.
Activate [free-action] Interact; Frequency once per day; Trigger You
attempt to Pick a Lock but haven’t rolled yet; Effect The key
casts knock on the lock you’re trying to pick.
Type standard; Level 5; Price 125 gp
Type greater; Level 11; Price 1,250 gp
The key grants a +2 item bonus, and you can activate the key
once per hour.
THURIBLE OF REVELATION ITEM 3+
DIVINATION DIVINE
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
This brass censer dangles on a length of chain.
Most thuribles of revelation are adorned with
swirling Celestial text, though some are iron
and feature Infernal or Abyssal text.
Activate [two-actions] Interact; Cost incense worth
at least 5 gp; Effect You light the incense inside the
censer, and it burns for 1 hour. During that time, as long you
are holding the thurible, you gain a +1 item bonus to Religion
checks, and any critical failure you roll when you Decipher
Writing of a religious nature is a failure instead.
Type lesser; Level 3; Price 55 gp
Type moderate; Level 10; Price 900 gp
The thurible grants a +2 bonus. Once per day, when you
activate the thurible, you can increase its revelations. During
that activation, you can hold the thurible up to your eyes with
an Interact action to gain the effects of see invisibility for 1
round by peering through the smoke.
Type greater; Level 18; Price 19,000 gp
The thurible grants a +3 bonus. The greater version shares the
once-per-day enhanced revelations of the moderate version,
except peering through the smoke also grants you the effects
of true seeing.
575
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
TRAVELER’S ANY-TOOL ITEM 6
MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 200 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk 1
Before it’s activated, this item appears to be an ash rod capped
with steel on either end.
Activate [two-actions] Interact, envision; Effect You imagine a
specific simple tool, and the any-tool transforms into it.
(Usually, you can choose from a tool listed in Chapter 6). This
transforms the wooden portion into any haft and the metal
caps into spades, hammer heads, or the like, allowing for most
basic tools but nothing more complex. You can return the item
to its rod form with an Interact action.
TRITON’S CONCH ITEM 9
MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 640 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
If you put this large opalescent conch shell to your ear,
you can hear the sound of the roaring sea crashing against
the shore.
Activate [one-action] Interact (auditory); Effect You can raise
the conch to your lips and blow into it, letting out a long,
rumbling note. For the next minute, you and all allies who
were within 30 feet of you when you activated the conch
gain a +2 item bonus to Athletics checks to Swim and can
breathe under water.
WONDROUS FIGURINE ITEM 2+
CONJURATION MAGICAL
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Each one of these statuettes is 1 inch in height, carved from
a specific material and taking the shape of a particular animal
or animals.
Activate [two-actions] command, Interact; Effect You activate
the statue by placing it on solid ground and then speaking
its name, causing the statuette to transform into a living
creature or creatures. In creature form, the figurine has the
minion trait. It can understand your language and it obeys
you to the best of its ability when you use an action to
command it. The specifics of each creature, as well as the
activation’s frequency (if any), appear in its entry below.
If the figurine is slain while in animal form, it reverts to
its statue shape and cannot be activated again until 1 week
has passed. If the figurine is destroyed in statue form, it is
shattered and its magic is lost.
Type golden lions; Level 10; Price 900 gp
This statuette depicts a pair of gold lions, and when activated,
it becomes a pair of adult lions (Pathfinder Bestiary 52). The
lions can be called on only once per day, and they remain
in lion form for no more than 1 hour. If either of the lions
is slain, that lion cannot be summoned again until 1 week
has passed, but this doesn’t prevent you from summoning
the other.
Type jade serpent; Level 7; Price 340 gp
This tiny statue first appears to be a formless lump of jade
until closer inspection reveals it to be a serpentine body curled
into a snug knot. When activated, this figurine becomes a
giant viper (Pathfinder Bestiary 303). The figurine can be used
only once per day, and it can remain in serpent form for no
more than 10 minutes.
Type marble elephant; Level 13; Price 2,700 gp
Finely carved from a solid piece of marble, this gleaming
elephant statuette becomes a fully grown elephant
(Pathfinder Bestiary 154) when activated. The elephant
can be called upon no more than four times per month.
It remains for 24 hours as long as it is being used as a
beast of burden or for transport. If it attempts an attack or
otherwise engages in combat, it reverts to statuette form
after 1d4 rounds.
Type obsidian steed; Level 15 (uncommon); Price 6,000 gp
This sinister-looking black statuette resembles a horse rearing
up on its hind legs. When activated, this figurine becomes a
nightmare (Pathfinder Bestiary 244). It can be called upon
once per week for up to 24 hours, though it won’t use plane
shift or its other abilities on behalf of its rider. Although evil,
it allows itself to be ridden by creatures of any alignment,
although if a good creature mounts it, the rider must attempt
a DC 3 flat check. On a failure, the nightmare uses plane shift
to take the rider to a random location in the Abyss, where
it promptly returns to statue form, stranding its rider in that
nightmarish place.
Type onyx dog; Level 2; Price 34 gp
This simple onyx statue transforms into a guard dog
(Pathfinder Bestiary 102). The dog has a +4 circumstance
bonus to Survival checks to Track, and it has darkvision.
When the dog senses a hidden creature with its scent, that
creature is instead observed and concealed. The onyx dog
can be activated once per week and remains in its form for
up to 6 hours.
Core Rulebook
576
Materials
Most items are made from readily available materials—
usually leather, wood, or steel—but some weapons and
armor are made from more exotic materials, giving
them unique properties and other advantages. Weapons
made from precious materials are better able to harm
certain creatures, and armor of these materials provides
enhanced protection.
Most materials are metals; they can be used to make
metal weapons and armor. The GM is the final arbiter of
what items can be made using a material. An item can be
made with no more than one precious material, and only
an expert in Crafting can create it. Some rare and exotic
materials require master or even legendary proficiency.
A material’s Price depends on how hard it is to work,
its scarcity, and its purity; most items made with precious
materials use an alloy, blend, or coating rather than using
the material in its purest form. The three grades of purity
for precious materials are low-grade, standard-grade, and
high-grade. Regardless of a precious material’s purity, an
item made from it gains the full effects of the precious
material, but creating higher-level items and more powerful
magic runes with precious material requires greater purity.
Some precious materials are available only at certain
grades. For instance, adamantine can’t be low-grade, and
orichalcum must be high-grade. Items made of materials
with a lower grade than expected for the item’s level, or of
a higher grade than necessary, will mention the precious
material’s grade.
Material Statistics
Table 11–4 below provides the Hardness, Hit Points,
Broken Threshold, and example items for some types
of common materials. The table has separate entries for
thin items (like shields), ordinary items (like armor), and
reinforced or durable structures (such as walls).
Stone is a catchall for any hard stone, such as granite
and marble. Likewise, wood covers ordinary woods, such
as oak and pine. Metal weapons and armor are assumed
to be made of iron or steel unless noted otherwise.
If an object consists of more than one material, the
GM typically uses the statistics for the strongest material
involved. For instance, breaking a wall made of paper
panels over a woven wooden framework would require
damaging thin wood, not paper. However, the GM
might choose the weaker material based on the item’s
function. For instance, breaking the wooden handle of
a hammer rather than its iron head would still render
the item unusable. Sometimes an item is even less sturdy
than the Hardness and Hit Points provided for a thin
object; for instance, a twig doesn’t take 9 damage to
break, even though it’s made of thin wood. Similarly,
a particularly sturdy item or structure might have even
higher Hardness and Hit Points. Certain structures,
particularly thick walls, are so reinforced that you have
to break them down over time with tools. (Page 515 has
more information on walls.)
Precious Materials
Materials with the precious trait can be substituted for
base materials. For example, a hammer’s head could be
made of adamantine instead of iron. Items made of a
precious material cost more than typical items; not only
does precious material cost more, but the crafter must
invest more time working with it. In addition, more
powerful items require precious materials of greater purity.
TABLE 11–4: MATERIAL HARDNESS, HIT POINTS, AND BROKEN THRESHOLD
Material Hardness HP BT Example Items
Paper 0 1 — Book pages, paper fan, scroll
Thin cloth 0 1 — Kite, silk dress, undershirt
Thin glass 0 1 — Bottle, spectacles, window pane
Cloth 1 4 2 Cloth armor, heavy jacket, sack, tent
Glass 1 4 2 Glass block, glass table, heavy vase
Glass structure 2 8 4 Glass block wall
Thin leather 2 8 4 Backpack, jacket, pouch, strap, whip
Thin rope 2 8 4 Standard adventuring rope
Thin wood 3 12 6 Chair, club, sapling, wooden shield
Leather 4 16 8 Leather armor, saddle
Rope 4 16 8 Industrial rope, ship rigging
Thin stone 4 16 8 Chalkboard, slate tiles, stone cladding
Thin iron or steel 5 20 10 Chain, steel shield, sword
Wood 5 20 10 Chest, simple door, table, tree trunk
Stone 7 28 14 Paving stone, statue
Iron or steel 9 36 18 Anvil, iron or steel armor, stove
Wooden structure 10 40 20 Reinforced door, wooden wall
Stone structure 14 56 28 Stone wall
Iron or steel structure 18 72 36 Iron plate wall
577
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
A number of precious materials are described below. The
Price entry for each material gives the Price of a simple
non-magical item made of that material, based on its Bulk
(if the item is lighter than 1 Bulk, use the price for 1 Bulk),
as well as Prices for different amounts of the material itself.
Prices for armor, shields, and weapons made of precious
material are in the Armor (page 555), Shields (page 586),
and Weapons (page 599) sections of this chapter.
Crafting with Precious Materials
Only an expert crafter can create a low-grade item, only
a master can create a standard-grade item, and only a
legendary crafter can create a high-grade item. In addition,
to Craft with a precious material, your character level
must be equal to or greater than that of the material.
Low-grade items can be used in the creation of magic
items of up to 8th level, and they can hold runes of up
to 8th level. Standard-grade items can be used to create
magic items of up to 15th level and can hold runes of
up to 15th level. High-grade items use the purest form
of the precious material, and can be used to Craft magic
items of any level holding any runes. Using purer forms
of common materials is so relatively inexpensive that the
Price is included in any magic item.
When you Craft an item that incorporates a precious
material, your initial raw materials for the item must
include that material; at least 10% of the investment
must be of the material for low-grade, at least 25% for
standard-grade, and all of it for high-grade. For instance,
a low-grade silver object of 1 Bulk costs 20 gp. Of the 10
gp of raw materials you provide when you start to Craft
the item, at least 1 gp must be silver. The raw materials
you spend to complete the item don’t have to consist of the
precious material, though the GM might rule otherwise in
certain cases.
After creating an item with a precious material, you can
use Craft to improve its grade, paying the Price difference
and providing a sufficient amount of the precious material.
ADAMANTINE MATERIAL 8+
UNCOMMON PRECIOUS
Mined from rocks that fell from the heavens, adamantine is one
of the hardest metals known. It has a shiny, black appearance,
and it is prized for its amazing resiliency and ability to hold an
incredibly sharp edge.
Type adamantine chunk; Price 500 gp; Bulk L
Type adamantine ingot; Price 5,000 gp; Bulk 1
Type standard-grade adamantine object; Level 8; Price 350 gp
per Bulk
Type high-grade adamantine object; Level 16; Price 6,000 gp
per Bulk
Adamantine Items Hardness HP BT
Thin Items
Standard-grade 10 40 20
High-grade 13 52 26
Items
Standard-grade 14 56 28
High-grade 17 68 34
Structures
Standard-grade 28 112 56
High-grade 34 136 68
COLD IRON MATERIAL 2+
 PRECIOUS
Weapons made from cold iron are deadly to demons and fey alike.
Cold iron looks like normal iron but is mined from particularly
pure sources and shaped with little or no heat. This process is
extremely difficult, especially for high-grade cold iron items.
Type cold iron chunk; Price 10 gp; Bulk L
Type cold iron ingot; Price 100 gp; Bulk 1
Type low-grade cold iron object; Level 2; Price 20 gp per Bulk
Type standard-grade cold iron object; Level 7; Price 250 gp
per Bulk
Type high-grade cold iron object; Level 15; Price 4,500 gp
per Bulk
Cold Iron Items Hardness HP BT
Thin Items
Low-grade 5 20 10
Standard-grade 7 28 14
High-grade 10 40 20
Items
Low-grade 9 36 18
Standard-grade 11 44 22
High-grade 14 56 28
Structures
Low-grade 18 72 36
Standard-grade 22 88 44
High-grade 28 112 56
DARKWOOD MATERIAL 8+
UNCOMMON PRECIOUS
Darkwood is a very lightweight wood found primarily in oldgrowth forests in south-central Avistan; it is dark as ebony but
has a slight purple tint. A darkwood item’s Bulk is reduced by
1 (or to light Bulk if its normal Bulk is 1, with no effect on an
item that normally has light Bulk). The Price of an item made
of darkwood is based on the item’s normal Bulk, not its reduced
Bulk for being made of darkwood, but reduce the Bulk before
making any further Bulk adjustments for the size of the item.
Type darkwood branch; Price 500 gp; Bulk L
Type darkwood lumber; Price 5,000 gp; Bulk 1
Type standard-grade darkwood object; Level 8; Price 350 gp
per Bulk
Type high-grade darkwood object; Level 16; Price 6,000 gp
per Bulk
Darkwood Items Hardness HP BT
Thin Items
Standard-grade 5 20 10
High-grade 8 32 16
Core Rulebook
578
Items
Standard-grade 7 28 14
High-grade 10 40 20
Structures
Standard-grade 14 56 28
High-grade 20 80 40
DRAGONHIDE MATERIAL 8+
UNCOMMON PRECIOUS
The hide and scales of a dragon can be used to Craft any item
normally made of ordinary leather or hide. Dragonhide varies in
color from blue to glittering gold, depending on the dragon it came
from. Due to the scales’ resiliency, it can also be used to Craft
armor usually made out of metal plates (such as a breastplate,
half plate, and full plate), allowing such armor to be made without
metal. Dragonhide objects are immune to one damage type,
depending on the type of dragon (see the table below).
Type standard-grade dragonhide object; Level 8; Price 350 gp
per Bulk
Type high-grade dragonhide object; Level 16; Price 6,000 gp
per Bulk
Dragon Type Resistance
Black or copper Acid
Blue or bronze Electricity
Brass, gold, or red Fire
Green Poison
Silver or white Cold
Dragonhide Items Hardness HP BT
Thin Items
Standard-grade 4 16 8
High-grade 8 32 16
Items
Standard-grade 7 28 14
High-grade 11 44 22
MITHRAL MATERIAL 8+
UNCOMMON PRECIOUS
Mithral is renowned for its lightness, durability, and
effectiveness against a range of creatures including devils and
lycanthropes. It has the same sheen as silver but a slightly
lighter hue. Mithral weapons and armor are treated as if
they were silver for the purpose of damaging creatures with
weakness to silver. A metal item made of mithral is lighter
than one made of iron or steel: the item’s Bulk is reduced by
1 (reduced to light Bulk if its normal Bulk is 1, with no effect
on an item that normally has light Bulk). The Price of an item
made of this material is based on the item’s normal Bulk, not
its reduced Bulk for being made of mithral, but reduce the
Bulk before making any further Bulk adjustments for the size
of the item.
Type mithral chunk; Price 500 gp; Bulk L
Type mithral ingot; Price 5,000 gp; Bulk 1
Type standard-grademithral object; Level 8; Price 350 gp per Bulk
Type high-grade mithral object; Level 16; Price 6,000 gp per Bulk
Mithral Items Hardness HP BT
Thin Items
Standard-grade 5 20 10
High-grade 8 32 16
Items
Standard-grade 9 36 18
High-grade 12 48 24
Structures
Standard-grade 18 72 36
High-grade 24 96 48
ORICHALCUM MATERIAL 17+
RARE PRECIOUS
The most rare and valuable skymetal, orichalcum is coveted for
its incredible time-related magical properties. This dull, coppery
metal isn’t as physically sturdy as adamantine, but orichalcum’s
time-bending properties protect it, granting it greater Hardness
and Hit Points. If an orichalcum item takes damage but isn’t
destroyed, it repairs itself completely 24 hours later.
Type orichalcum chunk; Price 1,000 gp; Bulk L
Type orichalcum ingot; Price 10,000 gp; Bulk 1
Type high-grade orichalcum object; Level 17; Price 10,000 gp
per Bulk
Orichalcum Items Hardness HP BT
Thin Items
High-grade 16 64 32
Items
High-grade 18 72 36
Structures
High-grade 35 140 70
SILVER MATERIAL 2+
 PRECIOUS
Silver weapons are a bane to creatures ranging from devils to
werewolves. Silver items are less durable than steel items, and
low-grade silver items are usually merely silver-plated.
Type silver chunk; Price 10 gp; Bulk L
Type silver ingot; Price 100 gp; Bulk 1
Type low-grade silver object; Level 2; Price 20 gp per Bulk
Type standard-grade silver object; Level 7; Price 250 gp per Bulk
Type high-grade silver object; Level 15; Price 4,500 gp per Bulk
Silver Items Hardness HP BT
Thin Items
Low-grade 3 12 6
Standard-grade 5 20 10
High-grade 8 32 16
Items
Low-grade 5 20 10
Standard-grade 7 28 14
High-grade 10 40 20
Structures
Low-grade 10 40 20
Standard-grade 14 56 28
High-grade 20 80 40
579
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Runes
Most magic weapons and armor gain their enhancements
from potent eldritch runes etched into them. These runes
allow for in-depth customization of items.
Runes must be physically engraved on items through a
special process to convey their effects. They take two forms:
fundamental runes and property runes. Fundamental
runes offer the most basic and essential benefits: a weapon
potency rune adds a bonus to a weapon’s attack rolls,
and the striking rune adds extra weapon damage dice. An
armor potency rune increases the armor’s item bonus to
AC, and the resilient rune grants a bonus to the wearer’s
saving throws. Property runes, by contrast, grant more
varied effects—typically powers that are constant while
the armor is worn or that take effect each time the weapon
is used, such as a rune that grants energy resistance or one
that adds fire damage to a weapon’s attacks.
The number of property runes a weapon or armor can
have is equal to the value of its potency rune. A +1 weapon
can have one property rune, but it could hold another
if the +1 weapon potency rune were upgraded to a +2
weapon potency rune. Since the striking and resilient runes
are fundamental runes, they don’t count against this limit.
An item with runes is typically referred to by the value of
its potency rune, followed by any other fundamental runes,
then the names of any property runes, and ends with the
name of the base item. For example, you might have a +1
longsword or +2 greater resilient fire-resistant chain mail.
Rune-etched armor and weapons have the same Bulk
and general characteristics as the non-magical version
unless noted otherwise. The level of an item with runes
etched onto it is equal to the highest level among the base
item and all runes etched on it; therefore, a +1 striking
mace (a 4th-level item) with a disrupting rune (a 5th-level
rune) would be a 5th-level item.
Each rune can be etched into a specific type of armor or
weapon, as indicated in the Usage entry of the rune’s stat
block. Explorer’s clothing can have armor runes etched on
it even though it’s not armor, but because it’s not in the
light, medium, or heavy armor category, it can’t have runes
requiring any of those categories.
Investiture
If a suit of armor has any runes, it has the invested trait,
requiring you to invest it to get its magical benefits.
Rune Formulas
The Price of a rune’s formula is the same as the Price of a
formula for an item of the same level; it can be acquired in
the same way as an item formula (described on page 293).
The Etching Process
Etching a rune on an item follows the same process as
using the Craft activity to make an item. You must have
the formula for the rune, the item you’re adding the rune to
must be in your possession throughout the etching process,
and you must meet any special Craft Requirements of the
rune. The rune has no effect until you complete the Craft
activity. You can etch only one rune at a time.
Transferring Runes
You can transfer runes between one item and another,
including a runestone (page 571). This also uses the Craft
activity. This lets you either move one rune from one item
to another or swap a rune on one item with a rune on the
other item. To swap, the runes must be of the same form
(fundamental or property).
If an item can have two or more property runes, you
decide which runes to swap and which to leave when
transferring. If you attempt to transfer a rune to an item
that can’t accept it, such as transferring a melee weapon
rune to a ranged weapon, you get an automatic critical
failure on your Crafting check. If you transfer a potency
rune, you might end up with property runes on an item
that can’t benefit from them. These property runes go
dormant until transferred to an item with the necessary
potency rune or until you etch the appropriate potency
rune on the item bearing them.
The DC of the Crafting check to transfer a rune is
determined by the item level of the rune being transferred,
and the Price of the transfer is 10% of the rune’s Price,
unless transferring from a runestone, which is free. If you’re
swapping, use the higher level and higher Price between the
two runes to determine these values. It takes 1 day (instead
of the 4 days usually needed to Craft) to transfer a rune or
swap a pair of runes, and you can continue to work over
additional days to get a discount, as usual with Craft.
Fundamental Runes
Four fundamental runes produce the most essential magic
of protection and destruction: armor potency and resilient
runes for armor, and weapon potency and striking runes for
weapons. A potency rune is what makes a weapon a magic
weapon (page 599) or armor magic armor (page 556).
An item can have only one fundamental rune of each
type, though etching a stronger rune can upgrade an
existing rune to the more powerful version (as described
in each rune’s entry). As you level up, you typically
alternate between increasing an item’s potency rune and
its striking or resilient rune when you can afford to.
Fundamental Rune Etched Onto Benefit
Armor potency Armor Increase item bonus to AC
and determine maximum
number of property runes
Resilient Armor Grant item bonus to saves
Weapon potency Weapon Grant an item bonus to
attack rolls and determine
maximum number of
property runes
Striking Weapon Increase weapon damage
 dice
Core Rulebook
580
SPECIFIC ARMOR AND WEAPONS
Unlike armor and weapons enhanced with runes, specific
armor and weapons (such as ghoul hide or a holy avenger)
are created for a specific purpose and can work quite
differently from other items of their type. Specific magic
armor and weapons can’t gain property runes, but you
can add or improve their fundamental runes.
RUNE TRANSFER EXAMPLES
You could transfer a flaming rune from a +1 striking
flaming greatsword to a +2 striking longsword, resulting
in a +2 striking flaming longsword and a +1 striking
greatsword. You could swap the weapon potency runes
from a +1 longsword and a +2 greatsword, resulting in a
+2 longsword and a +1 greatsword. However, you couldn’t
swap a +1 weapon potency rune from one weapon with a
flaming property rune from another weapon, as the two
runes don’t have the same form.
When transferring a rune to an item that can hold
multiple property runes, you can decide whether you
transfer a single rune or swap runes between the items.
For example, a +2 weapon can hold two property runes. If
you transferred a flaming rune from a +1 striking flaming
rapier to a +2 striking frost warhammer, you would
decide whether you wanted to end up with a +1 striking
rapier and a +2 striking flaming frost warhammer or a +1
striking frost rapier and a +2 striking flaming warhammer.
Fundamental Armor Runes
ARMOR POTENCY RUNE 5+
ABJURATION MAGICAL
Usage etched onto armor
Magic wards deflect attacks. Increase the armor’s item bonus
to AC by 1. The armor can be etched with one property rune.
You can upgrade the armor potency rune already etched
on a suit of armor to a stronger version, increasing the
values of the existing rune to those of the new rune. You
must have the formula of the stronger rune to do so, and
the Price of the upgrade is the difference between the two
runes’ Prices.
Type +1 armor potency; Level 5; Price 160 gp; Craft
Requirements You are an expert in Crafting.
Type +2 armor potency; Level 11; Price 1,060 gp; Craft
Requirements You are a master in Crafting.
Increase the armor’s item bonus to AC by 2, and the armor can
be etched with two property runes.
Type +3 armor potency; Level 18; Price 20,560 gp; Craft
Requirements You are legendary in Crafting.
Increase the armor’s item bonus to AC by 3, and the armor can
be etched with three property runes.
RESILIENT RUNE 8+
ABJURATION MAGICAL
Usage etched onto armor
Resilient runes imbue armor with additional protective magic.
This grants the wearer a +1 item bonus to saving throws.
You can upgrade the resilient rune already etched on a suit
of armor to a stronger version, increasing the values of the
existing rune to those of the new rune. You must have the
formula of the stronger rune to do so, and the Price of the
upgrade is the difference between the two runes’ Prices.
Type resilient; Level 8; Price 340 gp
Type greater resilient; Level 14; Price 3,440 gp
The armor grants a +2 item bonus to saving throws.
Type major resilient; Level 20; Price 49,440 gp
The armor grants a +3 item bonus to saving throws.
Fundamental Weapon Runes
STRIKING RUNE 4+
EVOCATION MAGICAL
Usage etched onto a weapon
A striking rune stores destructive magic in the weapon,
increasing the weapon damage dice it deals to two instead of
one. For instance, a +1 striking dagger would deal 2d4 damage
instead of 1d4 damage.
You can upgrade the striking rune already etched on a
weapon to a stronger version, increasing the values of the
existing rune to those of the new rune. You must have the
formula of the stronger rune to do so, and the Price of the
upgrade is the difference between the two runes’ Prices.
Type striking; Level 4; Price 65 gp
Type greater striking; Level 12; Price 1,065 gp
The weapon deals three weapon damage dice.
Type major striking; Level 19; Price 31,065 gp
The weapon deals four weapon damage dice.
WEAPON POTENCY RUNE 2+
EVOCATION MAGICAL
Usage etched onto a weapon
Magical enhancements make this weapon strike true. Attack
rolls with this weapon gain a +1 item bonus, and the weapon
can be etched with one property rune.
You can upgrade the weapon potency rune already
etched on a weapon to a stronger version, increasing the
values of the existing rune to those of the new rune. You
must have the formula of the stronger rune to do so, and
the Price of the upgrade is the difference between the two
runes’ Prices.
Type +1 weapon potency; Level 2; Price 35 gp; Craft
Requirements You are an expert in Crafting.
Type +2 weapon potency; Level 10; Price 935 gp; Craft
Requirements You are a master in Crafting.
The item bonus to attack rolls is +2, and the weapon can be
etched with two property runes.
Type +3 weapon potency; Level 16; Price 8,935 gp; Craft
Requirements You are legendary in Crafting.
The item bonus to attack rolls is +3, and the weapon can be
etched with three property runes.
581
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
UPGRADING ARMOR AND WEAPON RUNES
You’ll often want to upgrade the fundamental runes of magic armor or a magic weapon you already have. This requires
upgrading each rune separately. Tables 11–5 and 11–6 summarize the Price of each step, with a number in parentheses
indicating the item’s level for the Craft activity. This also indicates the typical progression for an adventurer to follow when
upgrading their armor and weapons. The tables here don’t include progressions that aren’t as likely to come up, like turning
a +1 weapon directly into a +1 greater striking weapon.
TABLE 11–5: ARMOR UPGRADE PRICES
Starting Armor Improved Armor Price and Process
+1 armor +1 resilient armor 340 gp to etch resilient (8th level)
+1 resilient armor +2 resilient armor 900 gp to etch +2 armor potency (11th level)
+2 resilient armor +2 greater resilient armor 3,100 gp to etch greater resilient (14th level)
+2 greater resilient armor +3 greater resilient armor 19,500 gp to etch +3 armor potency (18th level)
+3 greater resilient armor +3 major resilient armor 46,000 gp to etch major resilient (20th level)
TABLE 11–6: WEAPON UPGRADE PRICES
Starting Weapon Improved Weapon Price and Process
+1 weapon +1 striking weapon 65 gp to etch striking (4th level)
+1 striking weapon +2 striking weapon 900 gp to etch +2 weapon potency (10th level)
+2 striking weapon +2 greater striking weapon 1,000 gp to etch greater striking (12th level)
+2 greater striking weapon +3 greater striking weapon 8,000 gp to etch +3 weapon potency (16th level)
+3 greater striking weapon +3 major striking weapon 30,000 gp to etch major striking (19th level)
Property Runes
Property runes add special abilities to armor or a weapon
in addition to the item’s fundamental runes. If a suit of
armor or a weapon has multiple etchings of the same
rune, only the highest-level one applies. You can upgrade
a property rune to a higher-level type of that rune in the
same way you would upgrade a fundamental rune.
Rune abilities that must be activated follow the rules
for activating magic items on page 532.
Armor Property Runes
ANTIMAGIC RUNE 15
UNCOMMON ABJURATION MAGICAL
Price 6,500 gp
Usage etched onto armor
This intricate rune displaces spell energy, granting you a +1
status bonus to saving throws against magical effects.
Activate [reaction] command; Frequency once per day; Trigger A
spell targets you or includes you in its area; Effect The armor
attempts to counteract the triggering spell with the effect of
a 7th-level dispel magic spell and a counteract modifier of +26.
Craft Requirements Supply one casting of dispel magic.
ENERGY-RESISTANT RUNE 8+
ABJURATION MAGICAL
Usage etched onto armor
These symbols convey protective forces from the Elemental
Planes. You gain resistance 5 to acid, cold, electricity, or fire.
The crafter chooses the damage type when creating the rune.
Multiple energy-resistant runes can be etched onto a suit of
armor; rather than using only the highest-level effect, each must
provide resistance to a different damage type. For instance, a +2
acid-resistant greater fire-resistant breastplate would give you
acid resistance 5 and fire resistance 10.
Type energy-resistant; Level 8; Price 420 gp
Type greater energy-resistant; Level 12; Price 1,650 gp
You gain resistance 10 to the specified damage type.
ETHEREAL RUNE 17
UNCOMMON CONJURATION MAGICAL
Price 13,500 gp
Usage etched onto armor
An ethereal rune replicates armor on the Ethereal Plane.
Activate [one-action] command; Frequency once per day; Effect You
gain the effects of an ethereal jaunt spell. This doesn’t require
concentration and lasts for 10 minutes or until you choose to
return to material form as a free action.
Craft Requirements Supply a casting of 9th level ethereal jaunt.
FORTIFICATION RUNE 12+
ABJURATION MAGICAL
Usage etched onto medium or heavy armor
A fortification rune wards against the most deadly attacks.
Each time you’re critically hit while wearing the etched armor,
attempt a DC 17 flat check. On a success, it becomes a normal
hit. This property thickens the armor, increasing its Bulk by 1
and the Strength required to reduce its penalties by 2.
Core Rulebook
582
Type fortification; Level 12; Price 2,000 gp
Type greater fortification; Level 18; Price 24,000 gp
The flat check DC is 14.
GLAMERED RUNE 5
ILLUSION MAGICAL
Price 140 gp
Usage etched onto armor
This armor can be disguised with a mere thought.
Activate [one-action] envision; Effect You change the shape and
appearance of this armor to appear as ordinary or fine clothes
of your imagining. The armor’s statistics do not change. Only a
creature that is benefiting from true seeing or a similar effect
can attempt to disbelieve this illusion, with a DC of 25.
INVISIBILITY RUNE 8+
ILLUSION MAGICAL
Usage etched onto light armor
Light seems to partially penetrate this armor.
Activate [one-action] command; Frequency once per day; Effect
Whispering the command word, you become invisible for 1
minute, gaining the effects of a 2nd-level invisibility spell.
Type invisibility; Level 8; Price 500 gp
Type greater invisibility; Level 10; Price 1,000 gp
You can activate the armor up to three times per day.
Craft Requirements Supply one casting of invisibility.
SHADOW RUNE 5+
MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Usage etched onto light or medium nonmetallic armor
Armor with this rune becomes hazy black. You gain a +1 item
bonus to Stealth checks while wearing the armor.
Type shadow; Level 3; Price 55 gp
Type greater shadow; Level 9; Price 650 gp
The item bonus is +2.
Type major shadow; Level 17; Price 14,000 gp
The item bonus is +3.
SLICK RUNE 3+
MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Usage etched onto armor
This property makes armor slippery, as though it were coated
with a thin film of oil. You gain a +1 item bonus to Acrobatics
checks to Escape and Squeeze.
Type slick; Level 3; Price 45 gp
Type greater slick; Level 8; Price 450 gp
The item bonus is +2.
Type major slick; Level 16; Price 9,000 gp
The item bonus is +3.
Weapon Property Runes
ANARCHIC RUNE 11
CHAOTIC EVOCATION MAGICAL
Price 1,400 gp
Usage etched onto a weapon without an axiomatic rune
An anarchic rune is jagged and asymmetrical, channeling
chaotic energy. A weapon with this rune deals an additional
1d6 chaotic damage against lawful targets. If you are lawful,
you are enfeebled 2 while carrying or wielding this weapon.
When you critically succeed at a Strike with this weapon
against a lawful creature, roll 1d6. On a 1 or 2, you deal double
minimum damage; on a 3 or 4, double your damage normally; on
a 5 or 6, you deal double maximum damage.
Craft Requirements You are chaotic.
AXIOMATIC RUNE 11
EVOCATION LAWFUL MAGICAL
Price 1,400 gp
Usage etched onto a weapon without an anarchic rune
Complex and symmetrical, an axiomatic rune imbues a weapon
with lawful energy. A weapon with this rune deals an additional
1d6 lawful damage against chaotic targets. If you are chaotic,
you are enfeebled 2 while carrying or wielding this weapon.
When you critically succeed at an attack roll with this
weapon against a chaotic creature, instead of rolling, count
each weapon damage die as average damage rounded up
(3 for d4, 4 for d6, 5 for d8, 6 for d10, 7 for d12).
Craft Requirements You are lawful.
CORROSIVE RUNE 8+
ACID CONJURATION MAGICAL
Usage etched onto a weapon
Acid sizzles across the surface of the weapon. When you hit
with the weapon, add 1d6 acid damage to the damage dealt.
In addition, on a critical hit, the target’s armor (if any) takes
3d6 acid damage (before applying Hardness); if the target has
a shield raised, the shield takes this damage instead.
Type corrosive; Level 8; Price 500 gp
Type greater corrosive; Level 15; Price 6,500 gp
The acid damage dealt by this weapon ignores the target’s acid
resistance. Increase the acid damage dealt to armor or a shield
on a critical hit to 6d6.
DANCING RUNE 13
UNCOMMON EVOCATION MAGICAL
Price 2,700 gp
Usage etched onto a melee weapon
A dancing weapon flies autonomously and strikes your foes.
Activate [two-actions] command, Interact; Effect You Release the
weapon and it dances through the air, fighting on its own
against the last enemy you attacked, or the nearest enemy to it
if your target has been defeated. At the end of your turn each
round, the weapon can Fly up to its fly Speed of 40 feet, and
then can either Fly again or Strike one creature within its reach.
The weapon has a space of 5 feet, but it doesn’t block or
impede enemies attempting to move though that space, nor
does it benefit from or provide flanking. The weapon can’t move
through an enemy’s space. The weapon can’t use reactions, and
its Fly actions don’t trigger reactions.
While it’s activated, a dancing weapon makes Strikes with an
attack modifier of +24 plus its item bonus to attack rolls. It uses
583
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
the weapon’s normal damage but has a +0 Strength modifier.
The weapon’s abilities that automatically trigger on a hit or
critical hit still function, but the weapon can’t be activated or
benefit from any of your abilities while dancing.
Each round, when the weapon is finished using its actions,
attempt a DC 6 flat check. On a failure, the activation ends and
the weapon falls to the ground. You can’t activate the item
again for 10 minutes.
DISRUPTING RUNE 5+
MAGICAL NECROMANCY
Usage etched onto a melee weapon
A disrupting weapon pulses with positive energy, dealing an
extra 1d6 positive damage to undead. On a critical hit, the
undead is also enfeebled 1 until the end of your next turn.
Type disrupting; Level 5; Price 150 gp
Type greater disrupting; Level 14 (uncommon), Price 4,300 gp
Increase the extra damage to 2d6. On a critical hit, instead
of being enfeebled 1, the undead creature must attempt a
DC 34 Fortitude save with the following effects. This is an
incapacitation effect.
Critical Success It’s enfeebled 1 until the end of your next turn.
Success It’s enfeebled 2 until the end of your next turn.
Failure It’s enfeebled 3 until the end of your next turn.
Critical Failure It’s destroyed.
FLAMING RUNE 8+
CONJURATION FIRE MAGICAL
Usage etched onto a weapon
This weapon is empowered by flickering flame. The weapon
deals an additional 1d6 fire damage on a successful Strike,
plus 1d10 persistent fire damage on a critical hit.
Type flaming; Level 8; Price 500 gp
Type greater flaming; Level 15; Price 6,500 gp
Increase the persistent damage on a critical hit to 2d10. Fire
damage dealt by this weapon (including the persistent fire
damage) ignores the target’s fire resistance.
FROST RUNE 8+
COLD CONJURATION MAGICAL
Usage etched onto a weapon
This weapon is empowered with freezing ice. It deals an
additional 1d6 cold damage on a successful Strike. On a critical
hit, the target is also slowed 1 until the end of your next turn
unless it succeeds at a DC 24 Fortitude save.
Type frost; Level 8; Price 500 gp
Type greater frost; Level 15; Price 6,500 gp
The save DC is 34. Cold damage dealt by this weapon ignores
the target’s cold resistance.
GHOST TOUCH RUNE 4
MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 75 gp
Usage etched onto a melee weapon
The weapon can harm creatures without physical form. A
ghost touch weapon is particularly effective against incorporeal
creatures, which almost always have a specific weakness to
ghost touch weapons. Incorporeal creatures can touch, hold,
and wield ghost touch weapons (unlike most physical objects).
GRIEVOUS RUNE 9
ENCHANTMENT MAGICAL
Price 700 gp
Usage etched onto a weapon
When your attack roll with this weapon is a critical hit and
gains the critical specialization effect, you gain an additional
benefit depending on the weapon group.
Axe You can damage a third creature, with the same restrictions.
Bow The Athletics check to pull the missile free is DC 20.
Brawling The target takes a –4 circumstance penalty to its save.
Club You can knock the target up to 15 feet away.
Dart The base persistent bleed damage increases to 2d6.
Flail You move the target 5 feet. You can’t move it away from
you, but you can move it in another direction of your choice.
Hammer You can also knock the target 5 feet away from you.
Knife The target takes a –5-foot status penalty to its Speed
while it has the persistent bleed damage.
Pick The extra damage from the critical specialization effect
increases to 4 per weapon damage die.
Polearm You can move the target up to 10 feet.
Shield You can knock the target up to 10 feet away.
Sling The target also takes a –10-foot status penalty to its Speed
for 1 round if it fails the save.
Spear The enfeebled condition lasts for 2 rounds.
Sword The target is flat-footed until the end of your next turn.
HOLY RUNE 11
EVOCATION GOOD MAGICAL
Price 1,400 gp
Usage etched onto a weapon without an unholy rune
Holy weapons command powerful celestial energy. A weapon
with this rune deals an extra 1d6 good damage against evil
targets. If you are evil, you are enfeebled 2 while carrying or
wielding this weapon.
Activate [reaction] command; Frequency once per day; Trigger
You critically succeed at an attack roll against an evil creature
with the weapon; Effect You regain HP equal to double the evil
creature’s level. This is a good, positive, healing effect.
Craft Requirements You are good.
KEEN RUNE 13
UNCOMMON MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 3,000 gp
Usage etched onto a piercing or slashing melee weapon
The edges of a keen weapon are preternaturally sharp. Attacks
with this weapon are a critical hit on a 19 on the die as long as
that result is a success. This property has no effect on a 19 if
the result would be a failure.
RETURNING RUNE 3
EVOCATION MAGICAL
Price 55 gp
Core Rulebook
584
Usage etched onto a thrown weapon
When you make a thrown Strike with this weapon, it flies back
to your hand after the Strike is complete. If your hands are full
when the weapon returns, it falls to the ground in your space.
SHIFTING RUNE 6
MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 225 gp
Usage etched onto a melee weapon
With a moment of manipulation, you can shift this weapon
into a different weapon with a similar form.
Activate [one-action] Interact; Effect The weapon takes the shape
of another melee weapon that requires the same number of
hands to wield. The weapon’s runes and any precious material
it’s made of apply to the weapon’s new shape. Any property
runes that can’t apply to the new form are suppressed until
the item takes a shape to which they can apply.
SHOCK RUNE 8+
ELECTRICITY EVOCATION MAGICAL
Usage etched onto a weapon
Electric arcs crisscross this weapon, dealing an extra 1d6
electricity damage on a hit. On a critical hit, electricity arcs out
to deal an equal amount of electricity damage to up to two other
creatures of your choice within 10 feet of the target.
Type shock; Level 8; Price 500 gp
Type greater shock; Level 15; Price 6,500 gp
Electricity damage dealt by this weapon ignores the target’s
electricity resistance (and the other creatures’ on a critical hit).
SPEED RUNE 16
RARE MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 10,000 gp
Usage etched onto a weapon
Attacks with a speed weapon are supernaturally swift. While
wielding a speed weapon, you gain the quickened condition,
but you can use the additional action granted only to make a
Strike with the etched weapon.
SPELL-STORING RUNE 13
UNCOMMON ABJURATION MAGICAL
Price 2,700 gp
Usage etched onto a melee weapon
A spell-storing rune creates a reservoir of eldritch energy within
the etched weapon. A spellcaster can spend 1 minute to cast
a spell of 3rd level or lower into the weapon. The spell must
have a casting of 2 actions or fewer and must be able to target
a creature other than the caster. The spell has no immediate
effect—it is instead stored for later. When you wield a
spell-storing weapon, you immediately know the name and level
of the stored spell. A spell-storing weapon found as treasure has
a 50% chance of having a spell of the GM’s choice stored in it.
Activate[one-action] command; Requirements On your previous action
this turn, you hit and damaged a creature with this weapon;
Effect You unleash the stored spell, which uses the target of
the triggering attack as the target of the spell. This empties the
spell from the weapon and allows a spell to be cast into it again.
If the spell requires a spell attack roll, the result of your attack
roll with the weapon determines the degree of success of the
spell, and if the spell requires a saving throw, the DC is 30.
Activate [one-action] command; Effect Harmlessly expend the stored
spell. This frees the weapon to have a new spell cast into it.
THUNDERING RUNE 8+
EVOCATION MAGICAL SONIC
Usage etched onto a weapon
This weapon lets out a peal of thunder when it hits, dealing
an extra 1d6 sonic damage on a successful Strike. On a critical
hit, the target has to succeed at a DC 24 Fortitude save or be
deafened for 1 minute (or 1 hour on a critical failure).
Type thundering; Level 8; Price 500 gp
Type greater thundering; Level 15; Price 6,500 gp
The save DC is 34, and the deafness is permanent. Sonic damage
dealt by this weapon ignores the target’s sonic resistance.
UNHOLY RUNE 11
EVIL EVOCATION MAGICAL
Price 1,400 gp
Usage etched onto a weapon without a holy rune
An unholy rune instills fiendish power into the etched weapon.
A weapon with this rune deals an additional 1d6 evil damage
when it hits a good target. If you are good, you are enfeebled
2 while carrying or wielding this weapon.
Activate [reaction] command; Frequency once per day; Trigger You
critically succeed at an attack roll against a good creature with
the weapon; Effect The target takes persistent bleed damage
equal to 1d8 per weapon damage die of the etched weapon.
Craft Requirements You are evil.
VORPAL RUNE 17
RARE EVOCATION MAGICAL
Price 15,000 gp
Usage etched onto a slashing melee weapon
Originally created as a means of slaying the legendary
jabberwock, vorpal weapons prove equally effective against
nearly any foe with a head.
Activate [reaction] envision (death, incapacitation); Trigger You roll
a natural 20 on a Strike with the weapon, critically succeed,
and deal slashing damage. The target must have a head;
Effect The target must succeed at a DC 37 Fortitude save or
be decapitated. This kills any creature except ones that don’t
require a head to live. For creatures with multiple heads, this
usually kills the creature only if you sever its last head.
WOUNDING RUNE 7
MAGICAL NECROMANCY
Price 340 gp
Usage etched onto a piercing or slashing melee weapon
Weapons with wounding runes are said to thirst for blood.
When you hit a creature with a wounding weapon, you deal an
extra 1d6 persistent bleed damage. On a critical hit, it instead
deals 1d12 persistent bleed damage.
585
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Shields
All magic shields are specific items with a wide variety
of protective effects, as described in their entries. Unlike
magic armor, magic shields can’t be etched with runes.
Precious Material Shields
Shields made of precious materials are more expensive
and have different durabilities. You can make bucklers
and most shields out of any of these precious materials,
but only darkwood can be used to make tower shields.
ADAMANTINE SHIELD ITEM 8+
UNCOMMON
Usage varies by shield
Adamantine shields are particularly sturdy, and when used for
a shield bash, they are adamantine weapons.
Type standard-grade adamantine buckler; Level 8; Price 400 gp;
Bulk L; Craft Requirements adamantine worth at least 50 gp
The shield has Hardness 8, HP 32, and BT 16.
Type standard-grade adamantine shield; Level 8; Price 440;
Bulk 1; Craft Requirements adamantine worth at least 55 gp
The shield has Hardness 10, HP 40, and BT 20.
Type high-grade adamantine buckler; Level 16; Price 8,000
gp; Bulk L; Craft Requirements adamantine worth at least
4,000 gp
The shield has Hardness 11, HP 44, and BT 22.
Type high-grade adamantine shield; Level 16; Price 8,800 gp;
Bulk 1; Craft Requirements adamantine worth at least 4,400 gp
The shield has Hardness 13, HP 52, and BT 26.
COLD IRON SHIELD ITEM 2+
Usage varies by shield
Cold iron shields don’t typically have an additional effect,
though when used for a shield bash, they are cold iron weapons.
Type low-grade cold iron buckler; Level 2; Price 30 gp; Craft
Bulk L; Requirements cold iron worth at least 15 sp
The shield has Hardness 3, HP 12, and BT 6.
Type low-grade cold iron shield; Level 2; Price 34 gp; Craft
Bulk 1; Requirements cold iron worth at least 17 sp
The shield has Hardness 5, HP 20, and BT 10.
Type standard-grade cold iron buckler; Level 7; Price 300 gp;
Bulk L; Craft Requirements cold iron worth at least 375 sp
The shield has Hardness 5, HP 20, and BT 10.
Type standard-grade cold iron shield; Level 7; Price 340 gp;
Bulk 1; Craft Requirements cold iron worth at least 425 sp
The shield has Hardness 7, HP 28, and BT 14.
Type high-grade cold iron buckler; Level 15; Price 5,000 gp;
Bulk L; Craft Requirements cold iron worth at least 2,500 gp
The shield has Hardness 8, HP 32, and BT 16.
Type high-grade cold iron shield; Level 15; Price 5,500 gp;
Bulk 1; Craft Requirements cold iron worth at least 2,750 gp
The shield has Hardness 10, HP 40, and BT 20.
DARKWOOD SHIELD ITEM 8+
UNCOMMON
Usage varies by shield
Darkwood shields are 1 Bulk lighter than normal (or light
Bulk if their normal Bulk is 1, with no effect on a shield that
normally has light Bulk).
Type standard-grade darkwood buckler; Level 8; Price 400 gp;
Bulk L; Craft Requirements darkwood worth at least 50 gp
The shield has Hardness 3, HP 12, and BT 6.
Type standard-grade darkwood shield; Level 8; Price 440 gp;
Bulk L; Craft Requirements darkwood worth at least 55 gp
The shield has Hardness 5, HP 20, and BT 10.
Type standard-grade darkwood tower shield; Level 8; Price 560
gp; Bulk 3; Craft Requirements darkwood worth at least 70 gp
The shield has Hardness 5, HP 20, and BT 10.
Type high-grade darkwood buckler; Level 16; Price 8,000 gp;
Bulk L; Craft Requirements darkwood worth at least 4,000 gp
The shield has Hardness 6, HP 24, and BT 12.
Type high-grade darkwood shield; Level 16; Price 8,800 gp;
Bulk L; Craft Requirements darkwood worth at least 4,400 gp
The shield has Hardness 8, HP 32, and BT 16.
Type high-grade darkwood tower shield; Level 16; Price
11,200 gp; Bulk 3; Craft Requirements darkwood worth at
least 5,600 gp
The shield has Hardness 8, HP 32, and BT 16.
DRAGONHIDE SHIELD ITEM 8+
UNCOMMON
Usage varies by shield
Dragonhide shields are each immune to one damage type
based on the type of dragon (see Dragonhide on page 579).
Type standard-grade dragonhide buckler; Level 8; Price 400 gp;
Bulk L; Craft Requirements dragonhide worth at least 50 gp
The shield has Hardness 2, HP 8, and BT 4.
Type standard-grade dragonhide shield; Level 8; Price 440 gp;
Bulk 1; Craft Requirements dragonhide worth at least 55 gp
The shield has Hardness 4, HP 16, and BT 8.
Type high-grade dragonhide buckler; Level 16; Price 8,000 gp;
Bulk L; Craft Requirements dragonhide worth at least 4,000 gp
The shield has Hardness 5, HP 20, and BT 10.
Type high-grade dragonhide shield; Level 16; Price 8,800 gp;
Bulk 1; Craft Requirements dragonhide worth at least 4,400 gp
The shield has Hardness 7, HP 28, and BT 14.
MITHRAL SHIELD ITEM 8+
UNCOMMON
Usage varies by shield
Mithral shields are 1 Bulk lighter than normal (or light Bulk if
their normal Bulk is 1, with no effect on a shield that normally
has light Bulk). When used for a shield bash, they are treated
as silver weapons.
Type standard-grade mithral buckler; Level 8; Price 400 gp;
Bulk L; Craft Requirements mithral worth at least 50 gp
The shield has Hardness 3, HP 12, and BT 6.
Type standard-grade mithral shield; Level 8; Price 440 gp;
Bulk 1; Craft Requirements mithral worth at least 55 gp
The shield has Hardness 5, HP 20, BT 10.
Type high-grade mithral buckler; Level 16; Price 8,000 gp;
Bulk L; Craft Requirements mithral worth at least 4,000 gp
Core Rulebook
586
The shield has Hardness 6, HP 24, and BT 12.
Type high-grade mithral shield; Level 16; Price 8,800 gp; Craft
Bulk 1; Requirements at least 4,400 gp of mithral
The shield has Hardness 8, HP 32, and BT 16.
ORICHALCUM SHIELD ITEM 17+
RARE
Usage varies by shield
Orichalcum shields’ time-bending properties are particularly
useful for keeping them intact. The first time each day an
orichalcum shield would be destroyed, it is instead left with 1
Hit Point and the broken condition.
Type high-grade orichalcum buckler; Level 17; Price 12,000 gp;
Bulk L; Craft Requirements orichalcum worth at least 6,000 gp
The shield has Hardness 14, HP 56, and BT 28.
Type high-grade orichalcum shield; Level 17; Price 13,200
gp; Bulk 1; Craft Requirements orichalcum worth at least
6,600 gp
The shield has Hardness 16, HP 64, and BT 32.
SILVER SHIELD ITEM 2+
Usage varies by shield
Silver shields don’t typically have an additional effect, though
when used for a shield bash, they are silver weapons.
Type low-grade silver buckler; Level 2; Price 30 gp; Bulk L;
Craft Requirements silver worth at least 15 sp
The shield has Hardness 1, HP 4, and BT 2.
Type low-grade silver shield; Level 2; Price 34 gp; Bulk 1; Craft
Requirements silver worth at least 17 sp
The shield has Hardness 3, HP 12, and BT 6.
Type standard-grade silver buckler; Level 7; Price 300 gp;
Bulk L; Craft Requirements silver worth at least 375 sp
The shield has Hardness 3, HP 12, BT 6.
Type standard-grade silver shield; Level 7; Price 340 gp; Bulk
1; Craft Requirements silver worth at least 425 sp
The shield has Hardness 5, HP 20, and BT 10.
Type high-grade silver buckler; Level 15; Price 5,000 gp; Bulk
L; Craft Requirements silver worth at least 2,500 gp
The shield has Hardness 6, HP 24, and BT 12.
Type high-grade silver shield; Level 15; Price 5,500 gp; Bulk 1;
Craft Requirements silver worth at least 2,750 gp
The shield has Hardness 8 HP 32, and BT 16.
Specific Shields
These shields have unique abilities that differentiate them
from their typical counterparts.
ARROW-CATCHING SHIELD ITEM 11
ABJURATION MAGICAL
Price 1,350 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
This wooden shield (Hardness 6, HP 24, BT 12) is carved with
images of overlapping fletched arrows.
Activate[reaction] Interact; Trigger A ranged weapon Strike targets
a creature within 15 feet of you when you have this shield
raised, and the attacker has not yet rolled their attack; Effect
The triggering Strike targets you instead of its normal target.
If it hits, you gain the effects of the Shield Block reaction.
DRAGONSLAYER’S SHIELD ITEM 9
UNCOMMON ABJURATION MAGICAL
Price 670 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
A dragonslayer’s shield is a steel shield covered with
dragonhide from a certain type of dragon, which distinguishes
each shield from the others. While raised, this steel shield
(Hardness 8, HP 32, BT 16) grants its circumstance bonus to
Reflex saves against area effects (as well as to AC, as normal).
While you hold the shield, it also grants you a +2 circumstance
bonus to Will saves against a dragon’s frightful presence
ability. The shield has resistance 10 against the damage type
corresponding to the type of dragon whose hide was used in
its creation (see dragonhide on page 579); this applies after
reducing the damage for Hardness, so when you use Shield
Block, the dragonslayer’s shield takes 18 less damage from
attacks of that damage type. You can use Shield Block against
attacks that deal damage of that type.
Craft Requirements The initial raw materials must include at
least 30 gp of dragonhide.
FLOATING SHIELD ITEM 11+
UNCOMMON MAGICAL
Usage strapped to 1 hand; Bulk L
A floating shield is usually carved with wing motifs. This
buckler (Hardness 6, HP 24, BT 12) can protect you on its own.
Activate [one-action] Interact; Frequency once per day; Effect The
shield magically releases itself and floats off your arm into
the air next to you, granting you its bonus automatically, as
if you had Raised the Shield. Because you’re not wielding the
shield, you can’t use reactions such as Shield Block with the
shield, but you gain its benefits even when using both of your
hands. After 1 minute, the shield drops to the ground, ending
its floating effect. While the shield is adjacent to you, you can
Interact to grasp it, ending its floating effect early.
Type floating shield; Level 11; Price 1,250 gp
Type greater floating shield; Level 16; Price 9,000 gp
You can activate the shield any number of times per day.
FORCE SHIELD ITEM 9
UNCOMMON EVOCATION FORCE MAGICAL
Price 650 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
The edges of this elaborately engraved steel shield (Hardness 8,
HP 32, BT 16) bear tiny glass tiles set in mosaic patterns.
Activate [one-action] command; Frequency once per day; Effect The
shield surrounds you with a bubble of force that protects you
from harm, granting you resistance 5 to physical damage for 1
minute. The bubble disappears if you cease holding the shield.
FORGE WARDEN ITEM 10
UNCOMMON ABJURATION MAGICAL
Price 975 gp
587
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
The religious symbol of Torag, the forge god—an ornate hammer
of dwarven construction—adorns the face of this steel shield
(Hardness 6, HP 24, BT 12). The shield is a religious symbol
of Torag.
You and any adjacent allies have fire resistance
5 while you have the shield raised. When used
for a Shield Block, the forge warden rings
out like the hammer strike of a blacksmith,
and the symbol glows as if lit by the fires
of a furnace.
Activate [free-action] command (fire); Trigger You use the
forge warden to Shield Block an adjacent creature’s
attack and the shield takes damage; Effect The attacking
creature takes 2d6 fire damage.
INDESTRUCTIBLE SHIELD ITEM 18
RARE ABJURATION MAGICAL
Price 24,000 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
An indestructible shield is a high-grade adamantine shield
(Hardness 13, HP 90) that can withstand just about any
damage. It can be damaged only by a disintegrate spell (roll
damage as if against a creature that failed its save)
or by an artifact tied to destruction, such as a
sphere of annihilation.
Craft Requirements The raw materials must
include at least 4,400 gp of adamantine.
LION’S SHIELD ITEM 6
CONJURATION MAGICAL
Price 245 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
This steel shield (Hardness 6, HP 36, BT 18)
is forged into the shape of a roaring lion’s head.
The lion’s head functions as +1 striking shield boss
that can’t be removed from the shield.
Activate [one-action] Raise a Shield; Frequency once per day; Effect
You animate the lion’s head. You Raise the Shield and make a
melee Strike with it as part of the same action. The shield’s
biting maw is a martial melee weapon that deals 2d6 piercing
damage and has the deadly 1d6 trait; it can’t be enhanced by
runes. The shield remains animated for 1 minute, during which
time you can Strike with it each time you Raise the Shield, as
well as with a Strike action.
REFLECTING SHIELD ITEM 18
UNCOMMON ABJURATION MAGICAL
Price 18,000 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
This high-grade silver buckler (Hardness 6, HP 24, BT 12)
is polished to a mirrorlike sheen. The shield functions as a
spellguard shield (see below) that can also reflect spells.
Activate [reaction] command; Frequency once per day; Trigger
You are targeted by a spell; Requirements The reflecting
shield is raised; Effect You attempt to reflect the spell on its
caster, with the effects of a 9th-level spell turning with a
counteract modifier of +40.
Craft Requirements Supply one casting of spell turning, and the
initial raw materials must include at least 2,750 gp of silver.
SPELLGUARD SHIELD ITEM 6
ABJURATION MAGICAL
Price 250 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
This shield bears eldritch glyphs to guard
against magic. While you have this steel shield
(Hardness 6, HP 24, BT 12) raised, you gain its
circumstance bonus to saving throws against spells
that target you (as well as to AC).
SPINED SHIELD ITEM 7
EVOCATION MAGICAL
Price 360 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
Five jagged spines project from the surface of this steel shield
(Hardness 6, HP 24, BT 12). The spines are +1 striking shield
spikes. When you use the Shield Block reaction with this
shield, the spines take the damage before the shield itself
does. When the shield would take damage (after
applying Hardness), one spine snaps off per
6 damage, reducing the damage by 6. The
shield takes any remaining damage. When
there are no spines left, the shield takes
damage as normal.
When all the spines are gone, you
lose the ability to attack with them until
the spines regenerate the next day.
Activate [one-action] Interact; Effect You shoot
one of the shield’s spines at a target. A
fired spine uses the spikes’ statistics, but it is
a martial ranged weapon with a range increment
of 120 feet.
STURDY SHIELD ITEM 4+
ABJURATION MAGICAL
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
With a superior design and excellent craftsmanship, this steel
shield has higher Hardness than its non-magical counterparts,
making it harder to break and destroy.
Type minor; Level 4; Price 100 gp
The shield has Hardness 8, HP 64, and BT 32.
Type lesser; Level 7; Price 360 gp
The shield has Hardness 10, HP 80, and BT 40.
Type moderate; Level 10; Price 1,000 gp
The shield has Hardness 13, HP 104, and BT 52.
Type greater; Level 13; Price 3,000 gp
The shield has Hardness 15, HP 120, and BT 60.
Type major; Level 16; Price 10,000 gp
The shield has Hardness 17, HP 136, and BT 68.
Type supreme; Level 19; Price 40,000 gp
The shield has Hardness 20, HP 160, and BT 80.
Core Rulebook
588
Snares
Snares are small annoyances and simple traps you can
create using the Crafting skill if you have the Snare
Crafting feat (page 266). Creating a snare requires a
snare kit (page 291) and an amount of raw materials
worth the amount listed in the snare’s Price entry. Unlike
other items, found snares cannot be collected or sold in
their complete form. Snares have the snare trait.
Crafting Snares
A snare is built within a single 5-foot square. Once
constructed, it can’t be moved without destroying
(and often triggering) the snare.
You must have the Snare Crafting feat to create snares.
You can spend 1 minute to Craft a snare at its listed Price.
If you want to Craft a snare at a discount, you must
spend downtime as described in the Craft activity.
Some snares have additional requirements beyond
those stated in the Craft activity; these snares list
their requirements in a Craft Requirements entry.
Detecting Snares
Creatures can detect snares as they would any
trap or hazard (as described on page 520), using
the creator’s Crafting DC as the snare’s Stealth
DC. As you become better at creating snares,
your snares become harder to detect by those
with lesser ability. If you are an expert in
Crafting, only a creature that is trained in
Perception  can find  your snares; if you are
a master in Crafting, only a creature that is an
expert in  Perception can find your snares; and if you are
legendary in Crafting, only a creature that is a master in
Perception can find your snares.
If your proficiency rank is expert or better in Crafting,
only creatures actively searching can find your snares.
Triggering Snares
Unless stated otherwise in a snare’s description, when a
Small or larger creature enters a snare’s square, the snare’s
effect occurs and then the snare is destroyed.
Disabling Snares
Once a creature discovers a snare, it can disable it much like
it can other physical traps, using the Disable a Device action
of the Thievery skill and using the Crafting DC of the snare’s
creator as the DC. As you become better at creating snares,
your snares become harder to disable by those with lesser
ability. If you are an expert in Crafting, only a creature that
is trained in Thievery can disable them; if you are a master
in Crafting, only a creature that is an expert in Thievery can
disable them; and if you are legendary in Crafting, only a
creature that is a master in Thievery can disable them.
You can automatically disarm a snare that you
personally Crafted without triggering it by spending an
Interact action while adjacent to the snare.
ALARM SNARE SNARE 1
AUDITORY CONSUMABLE MECHANICAL SNARE TRAP
Price 3 gp
You create an alarm snare by rigging one or more noisy
objects to a trip wire or pressure plate. When you create an
alarm snare, you designate a range between 100 to 500 feet
at which it can be heard. When a Small or larger creature
enters the square, the snare makes a noise loud enough that
it can be heard by all creatures in the range you designated.
BITING SNARE SNARE 4
CONSUMABLE MECHANICAL SNARE TRAP
Price 15 gp
The snare’s jaws shut on the leg of a creature that steps on
it. The snare deals 5d6 piercing damage to the first creature
that enters its square; that creature must attempt a DC 18
Reflex save.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature takes half damage.
Failure The creature takes full damage.
Critical Failure The creature takes double damage
and takes a –10-foot status penalty to its Speed until
it recovers at least 1 Hit Point.
BLEEDING SPINES SNARE SNARE 12
CONSUMABLE MECHANICAL SNARE TRAP
Price 320 gp
When a creature enters the square, spines
covered in numerous jagged thorns protrude
out to stab it, dealing 8d8 piercing damage and 2d8
persistent bleed damage. The creature must attempt a DC 31
basic Reflex saving throw. After the initial trigger, the spines
retract and protrude again repeatedly for 1 minute, forcing any
creature that enters the space or ends its turn in the space to
attempt a Reflex save against the spines’ damage.
BOMB SNARE SNARE 8
CONSUMABLE MECHANICAL SNARE TRAP
Price 75 gp
You create a snare that catalyzes three 3rd-level moderate
alchemical bombs of the same type to explode when a creature
enters the snare’s square. The target and all creatures in adjacent
squares must attempt a DC 26 Reflex save, as the snare deals
damage equal to three times the direct hit damage from one
of the component bombs (for example, 6d6 electricity damage
from bottled lightning) with no splash damage or other effects.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature takes half damage and no other effects.
Failure The creature takes full damage. It also takes all other
effects of a direct hit from one of the component bombs
(such as flat-footed from bottled lightning or persistent
damage from an acid flask).
Critical Failure The creature takes double damage, plus all
other effects of a direct hit (as failure).
Craft Requirements Supply six of the same damaging 3rd-level
moderate alchemical bomb.
589
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
CALTROP SNARE SNARE 1
CONSUMABLE MECHANICAL SNARE TRAP
Price 3 gp
This snare consists of a hidden canister of caltrops (page 287)
attached to a trip wire. When the snare is triggered, it flings the
caltrops into either the snare’s square or a square adjacent to
the snare. You choose which square when you set up the snare.
If the caltrops scatter into the same square as a creature,
that creature must attempt the Acrobatics check immediately.
Craft Requirements Supply a container of caltrops.
FLYING BLADE WHEEL SNARE SNARE 20
CONSUMABLE MECHANICAL SNARE TRAP
Price 10,000 gp
When a creature enters the square, a deadly flying wheel of
spinning blades launches at it, making a Strike with an attack
modifier of +33 and dealing 8d8 slashing damage. Once on
each of your turns, you can use an Interact action within 120
feet of the wheel to cause it to Fly up to 60 feet toward the
creature it’s chasing and make another Strike if it’s within 5
feet of its target after it moves. After 1 minute, the spinning
ceases and the wheel falls to the ground. Creatures can
destroy the wheel to stop it (AC 37, Fort +29, Ref +20, HP
200, Hardness 10, object immunities).
GRASPING SNARE SNARE 8
UNCOMMON CONSUMABLE MECHANICAL SNARE TRAP
Price 75 gp
You rig vines and ropes to hold a creature in place. The first
creature to enter the square must attempt a DC 26 Reflex
save, with the following effects.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature takes a –5-foot status penalty to its
Speed for 1 minute or until it Escapes (DC 26).
Failure The creature is immobilized for 1 round, then takes a
–5-foot status penalty to its Speed for 1 minute. Both effects
end early if it Escapes (DC 26)
Critical Failure The creature is immobilized for 1 minute or until
it Escapes (DC 26).
HAIL OF ARROWS SNARE SNARE 16
CONSUMABLE MECHANICAL SNARE TRAP
Price 1,500 gp
When a creature enters the snare’s square, it releases hundreds
upon hundreds of carefully prepared arrows, blanketing a
20-foot radius around the snare’s square with massive arrow
fire that deals 18d6 piercing damage. Creatures in the area
must attempt a DC 37 basic Reflex saving throw.
HAMPERING SNARE SNARE 1
CONSUMABLE MECHANICAL SNARE TRAP
Price 3 gp
You arrange brambles, wires, sticky goo, or other materials
to interfere with a creature’s movement. The square with
this snare, as well as three adjacent squares (to form a
10-foot-by-10-foot area), become difficult terrain when the first
creature enters the snare’s square. The difficult terrain affects
the creature’s movement right away, including its movement
into the triggering square, and it lasts for 1d4 rounds after the
snare is triggered. A creature can use an Interact action to
clear the difficult terrain out of a single square early.
HOBBLING SNARE SNARE 4
UNCOMMON CONSUMABLE MECHANICAL SNARE TRAP
Price 15 gp
You rig vines, ropes, or wires to cinch tight around a creature
that triggers this snare. The first creature to enter the square
must attempt a DC 20 Reflex save.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature takes a –5-foot status penalty to its
Speed for 1 minute or until it Escapes (DC 18).
Failure As success, but the penalty is –10 feet.
Critical Failure As success, but the penalty is –20 feet.
INSTANT EVISCERATION SNARE SNARE 20
CONSUMABLE MECHANICAL SNARE TRAP
Price 10,000 gp
When a creature enters the snare’s square, the snare releases
an unbelievable arsenal of blades, dealing 24d8 piercing
damage (DC 45 basic Reflex).
MARKING SNARE SNARE 1
CONSUMABLE MECHANICAL SNARE TRAP
Price 3 gp
This snare is often used to mark intruders for later tracking or
identification. When you create this snare, you must decide
whether to make it a dye or a scent marker. Either type of marking
grants a +2 circumstance bonus to Track the creature for up to
24 hours or until the dye or scent is washed off (requiring at least
a gallon of water and 10 minutes of scrubbing). A creature that
enters a square of the snare must attempt a DC 17 Reflex save.
Core Rulebook
590
Success The creature is unaffected.
Failure The snare marks the creature.
Critical Failure The snare marks the creature, and the creature
is blinded until the end of its next turn.
OMNIDIRECTIONAL SPEAR SNARE SNARE 16
CONSUMABLE MECHANICAL SNARE TRAP
Price 1,500 gp
As soon as a creature enters the snare’s square, the snare
unleashes wickedly powerful spears at the creature from all
directions, dealing 19d8 piercing damage (DC 37 basic Reflex).
SCYTHING BLADE SNARE SNARE 12
CONSUMABLE MECHANICAL SNARE TRAP
Price 320 gp
This snare sends a powerful series of scything blades to slice
through a creature entering the snare’s square, dealing 14d8
slashing damage (DC 31 basic Reflex).
SIGNALING SNARE SNARE 1
CONSUMABLE MECHANICAL SNARE TRAP
Price 3 gp
A subtle snare used in hunting or tracking, a signaling snare
often consists of carefully prepared earth, piled sand or
stones, specific arrangements of vegetation, and so forth.
When a creature enters a square of a signaling snare,
nothing happens to the creature, but instead it causes a
small, unobtrusive disruption to the terrain that allows the
snare’s creator or another creature who knows what to look
for to determine whether a creature of the appropriate size
entered the square.
SPIKE SNARE SNARE 1
CONSUMABLE MECHANICAL SNARE TRAP
Price 3 gp
This basic snare consists of hidden spikes that rely on a
creature’s momentum to lacerate or potentially impale it as it
enters the snare’s square, dealing 2d8 piercing damage. The
creature must attempt a DC 17 basic Reflex saving throw.
STALKER BANE SNARE SNARE 4
UNCOMMON CONSUMABLE MECHANICAL SNARE TRAP
Price 15 gp
This snare explodes in a burst of cloying powder that can cling
to a creature stepping into its square. A creature that enters
the square of a stalker bane snare must attempt a DC  20
Reflex save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success Powder sticks to the target, causing it to leave behind
telltale footprints. Being invisible makes the target hidden,
rather than undetected, to creatures that could see it if it
weren’t invisible.
Failure Powder clumps on the target, constantly flaking away.
Being invisible makes the target concealed, rather than
hidden or undetected, to creatures that could see it if it
weren’t invisible.
Critical Failure As failure, and the creature is blinded until the
end of its next turn.
STRIKING SNARE SNARE 8
CONSUMABLE MECHANICAL SNARE TRAP
Price 75 gp
You affix a trip line or other trigger to a group of either stones
or wooden stakes to strike a creature that enters the snare’s
square. The creature must attempt a DC 26 basic Reflex saving
throw. If you choose stones, the snare deals 9d8 bludgeoning
damage; if you choose spikes, it deals 9d8 piercing damage.
STUNNING SNARE SNARE 12
CONSUMABLE MECHANICAL SNARE TRAP
Price 320 gp
You rig a snare to disorient a creature with a quick bash,
leaving it with little ability to defend itself. The trap deals 6d6
bludgeoning damage to the first creature to enter its square;
that creature must attempt a DC 31 Reflex save.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature takes half damage and is flat-footed for 1
round and stunned 1.
Failure The creature takes full damage and is flat-footed for 1
round and stunned 2.
Critical Failure The creature takes double damage and is
flat-footed for 1 minute and stunned 4.
TRIP SNARE SNARE 4
CONSUMABLE MECHANICAL SNARE TRAP
Price 15 gp
You set a cunning wire to trip a creature. A Medium or smaller
creature that enters this snare’s square must attempt a DC 20
Reflex save.
If you want to create a trip snare to trip a larger creature,
you must create a group of contiguous snares of a length equal
to the edge of that larger creature’s space, and the creature
must be moving such that it moves into the full set of snares.
For example, three trip snares in a 15-foot-line can trip a Huge
creature coming down a corridor into the line of snares.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature is flat-footed until the start of its next turn.
Failure The creature falls prone.
Critical Failure The creature falls prone and takes 1d6
bludgeoning damage.
WARNING SNARE SNARE 4
AUDITORY CONSUMABLE MECHANICAL SNARE TRAP
Price 15 gp
Using materials specific to the area, you connect a
sound-making component to a trip wire or a pressure plate.
This snare is like an alarm snare, but its subtle sound blends
into ambient noise. You can detect this sound as long as you’re
within 1,000 feet of the snare and aren’t prevented from
hearing it. Other creatures in that area who are searching
might notice the sound if their Perception check result meets
or exceeds your Craft DC.
591
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Staves
A magical staff is an indispensable accessory for an elite
spellcaster. A staff is tied to one person during a preparation
process, after which the preparer, and only the preparer, can
harness the staff to cast a variety of spells throughout the
day. The spells that can be cast from a staff are listed in
bullet points organized by level under each version of the
staff. Many staves can be found in multiple versions, with
more powerful versions that contain more spells and can
hold more charges—such a staff always contains the spells
of all lower-level versions, in addition to the spells listed in
its own entry. All magical staves have the staff trait.
Casting Spells from a Staff
A staff gains charges when someone prepares it for the day.
The person who prepared a staff can expend the charges to
cast spells from it. You can Cast a Spell from a staff only if
you have that spell on your spell list, are able to cast spells
of the appropriate level, and expend a number of charges
from the staff equal to the spell’s level. Casting a Spell from
a staff requires holding the staff (typically in one hand) and
Activating the staff by Casting the Spell, which takes the
spell’s normal number of actions.
Use your spell attack roll and spell DC when Casting a
Spell from a staff. The spell gains the appropriate trait for
your magical tradition (arcane, divine, occult, or primal)
and can be affected by any modifications you can
normally make when casting spells, such as metamagic
feats. You must provide any material components, cost,
or focus required by the spell, or you fail to cast it.
Prepared spellcasters and spontaneous spellcasters
each have a unique way of altering how their staves gain
charges and the ways they can be used (see the Prepared
Spellcasters and Spontaneous Spellcasters sections below).
Casting Cantrips from a Staff
If a staff contains a cantrip, you can cast that cantrip using
the staff without expending any charges. The cantrip’s
level is heightened to the same level as cantrips you cast.
Preparing a Staff
During your daily preparations, you can prepare a staff to
add charges to it for free. When you do so, that staff gains a
number of charges equal to the highest level of spell you’re
able to cast. You don’t need to expend any spells to add
charges in this way. No one can prepare more than one
staff per day, nor can a staff be prepared by more than one
person per day. If the charges aren’t used within 24 hours,
they’re lost, and preparing the staff anew removes any
charges previously stored in it. You can prepare a staff only
if you have at least one of the staff’s spells on your spell list.
Prepared Spellcasters
A prepared spellcaster—such as a cleric, druid, or wizard—
can place some of their own magic in a staff to increase its
number of charges. When a prepared spellcaster prepares a
staff, they can expend a spell slot to add a number of charges
to the staff equal to the level of the spell. They can’t expend
more than one spell in this way each day. For example, if
Ezren can cast 3rd-level spells and prepared a staff, the staff
would gain 3 charges, but Ezren could increase this to 6
by expending one of his 3rd-level spells, 5 by expending a
2nd-level spell, or 4 by expending a 1st-level spell.
Spontaneous Spellcasters
A spontaneous spellcaster, such as a bard or sorcerer, can
reduce the number of charges it takes to Activate a staff by
supplementing with their own energy. When a spontaneous
spellcaster Activates a staff, they can expend 1 charge from
the staff and one of their spell slots to cast a spell from the
staff of the same level (or lower) as the expended spell slot.
This doesn’t change the number of actions it takes to cast
the spell. For example, if Seoni can cast 3rd-level spells and
prepared a staff, the staff would gain 3 charges. She could
expend 1 charge and one of her 3rd-level spell slots to cast
a 3rd-level spell from the staff, or 1 charge and one of her
2nd-level spell slots to cast a 2nd-level spell from the staff.
She could still expend 3 charges from the staff to cast a 3rdlevel spell from it without using any of her own slots, just
like any other spellcaster.
Attacking with a Staff
Staves are also staff weapons (page 280), included in their
Price. They can be etched with runes as normal for a staff.
This doesn’t alter any of their spellcasting abilities.
ANIMAL STAFF ITEM 4+
DIVINATION MAGICAL STAFF
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
This staff is topped with carved animal and monster heads.
While wielding the staff, you gain a +2 circumstance bonus to
Nature checks to identify animals.
Activate Cast a Spell; Effect You expend a number of charges
from the staff to cast a spell from its list.
Type animal staff; Level 4; Price 90 gp
• Cantrip know direction
• 1st magic fang, summon animal
Type greater animal staff; Level 8; Price 460 gp
• 2nd animal messenger, speak with animals, summon animal
• 3rd animal form, summon animal
Type major animal staff; Level 12; Price 1,900 gp
• 4th summon animal
• 5th animal form, moon frenzy, summon animal
Craft Requirements Supply one casting of all listed levels of
all listed spells.
MENTALIST’S STAFF ITEM 4+
DIVINATION MAGICAL STAFF
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
This polished wooden staff bears a swirling motif reminiscent
of the folds of a brain. While wielding the staff, you gain a +2
circumstance bonus to checks to identify mental magic.
Core Rulebook
592
Activate Cast a Spell; Effect You expend a number of charges
from the staff to cast a spell from its list.
Type mentalist’s staff; Level 4; Price 90 gp
• Cantrip daze
• 1st mindlink, phantom pain
Type greater mentalist’s staff; Level 8; Price 450 gp
• 2nd paranoia
• 3rd hypercognition, phantom pain
Type major mentalist’s staff; Level 12; Price 1,800 gp
• 4th modify memory, telepathy
• 5th phantom pain, synaptic pulse, synesthesia
Craft Requirements Supply one casting of all listed levels of
all listed spells.
STAFF OF ABJURATION ITEM 6+
ABJURATION MAGICAL STAFF
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
This intricately carved wooden staff is warm to the touch and
thrums with inner energy. While wielding the staff, you gain a
+2 circumstance bonus to checks to identify abjuration magic.
Activate Cast a Spell; Effect You expend a number of charges
from the staff to cast a spell from its list.
Type staff of abjuration; Level 6; Price 230 gp
• Cantrip shield
• 1st alarm, feather fall
• 2nd dispel magic, endure elements, resist energy
Type greater staff of abjuration; Level 10; Price 900 gp
• 3rd alarm, glyph of warding
• 4th dimensional anchor, dispel magic, resist energy
Type major staff of abjuration; Level 14; Price 4,000 gp
• 5th banishment, endure elements
• 6th dispel magic, repulsion
Craft Requirements Supply one casting of all listed levels of
all listed spells.
STAFF OF CONJURATION ITEM 6+
CONJURATION MAGICAL STAFF
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
This ash staff is decorated with animals; wielding it, you gain a
+2 circumstance bonus to checks to identify conjuration magic.
Activate Cast a Spell; Effect You expend a number of
charges from the staff to cast a spell from its list.
Type staff of conjuration; Level 6; Price 230 gp
• Cantrip tanglefoot
• 1st summon construct, unseen servant
• 2nd obscuring mist, phantom steed, summon construct,
summon elemental
Type greater staff of conjuration; Level 10; Price 900 gp
• 3rd stinking cloud, summon construct, summon elemental
• 4th creation, phantom steed, summon construct,
summon elemental
Type major staff of conjuration; Level 14; Price 4,000 gp
• 5th black tentacles, summon construct, summon
elemental
• 6th phantom steed, summon construct, summon
elemental
Craft Requirements Supply one casting of all listed levels
of all listed spells.
STAFF OF DIVINATION ITEM 6+
DIVINATION MAGICAL STAFF
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
Semiprecious gemstones emerge, seemingly at random, from the
surface of this gnarled wooden staff. While wielding it, you gain
a +2 circumstance bonus to checks to identify divination magic.
Activate Cast a Spell; Effect You expend a number of charges
from the staff to cast a spell from its list.
Type staff of divination; Level 6; Price 230 gp
• Cantrip detect magic
• 1st true strike
• 2nd comprehend language, darkvision, see invisibility
Type greater staff of divination; Level 10; Price 900 gp
• 3rd clairaudience, darkvision
• 4th clairvoyance, comprehend language, telepathy
Type major staff of divination; Level 14; Price 4,000 gp
• 5th prying eye, sending
• 6th telepathy, true seeing
Craft Requirements Supply one casting of all listed levels of
all listed spells.
STAFF OF ENCHANTMENT ITEM 6+
ENCHANTMENT MAGICAL STAFF
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
A mesmerizing gemstone caps the head of this handsomely
crafted wooden staff. While wielding the staff, you gain a +2
circumstance bonus to checks to identify enchantment magic.
Activate Cast a Spell; Effect You expend a number of charges
from the staff to cast a spell from its list.
Type staff of enchantment; Level 6; Price 230 gp
• Cantrip daze
• 1st charm, command
• 2nd hideous laughter, touch of idiocy
Type greater staff of enchantment; Level 10; Price 900 gp
• 3rd paralyze
• 4th charm, confusion, suggestion
Typemajor staff of enchantment; Level 14 (uncommon);
Price 4,000 gp
• 5th command, crushing despair
• 6th dominate, feeblemind
Craft Requirements Supply one casting of all listed levels of
all listed spells.
STAFF OF EVOCATION ITEM 6+
EVOCATION MAGICAL STAFF
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
This staff is tapered at the base and carved into a gemstudded twist at the top. While wielding the staff, you gain a
+2 circumstance bonus to checks to identify evocation magic.
Activate Cast a Spell; Effect You expend a number of charges
from the staff to cast a spell from its list.
Type staff of evocation; Level 6; Price 230 gp
• Cantrip ray of frost
593
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
• 1st magic missile, shocking grasp
• 2nd acid arrow, glitterdust
Type greater staff of evocation; Level 10; Price 900 gp
• 3rd lightning bolt, magic missile
• 4th fireball, weapon storm
Type major staff of evocation; Level 14; Price 4,000 gp
• 5th cone of cold, magic missile
• 6th chain lightning, wall of force
Craft Requirements Supply one casting of all listed levels
of all listed spells.
STAFF OF FIRE ITEM 3+
EVOCATION MAGICAL STAFF
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
This staff resembles a blackened and burned length of ashen
wood. It smells faintly of soot and glows as if lit by embers.
You can use an Interact action to touch the tip of this staff to a
torch, tinder, or a flammable substance to ignite a flame.
Activate Cast a Spell; Effect You expend a number of
charges from the staff to cast a spell from its list.
Type staff of fire; Level 3; Price 60 gp
• Cantrip produce flame
• 1st burning hands
Type greater staff of fire; Level 8; Price 450 gp
• 2nd burning hands, flaming sphere
• 3rd flaming sphere, fireball
Type major staff of fire; Level 12; Price 1,800 gp
• 4th fire shield, fireball, wall of fire
• 5th fireball, wall of fire
Craft Requirements Supply one casting of all listed levels of
all listed spells.
STAFF OF HEALING ITEM 4+
 MAGICAL NECROMANCY STAFF
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
Made of smooth, white wood, this staff is capped at
each end with a golden cross adorned with a multitude
of ruby cabochons. A staff of healing grants an item bonus
to the Hit Points you restore anytime you cast the heal spell
using your own spell slots or using charges from the staff.
Activate Cast a Spell; Effect You expend a number of charges
from the staff to cast a spell from its list.
Type staff of healing; Level 4; Price 90 gp
The item bonus granted to heal spells is +1.
• Cantrip stabilize
• 1st heal
Type greater staff of healing; Level 8; Price 470 gp
The item bonus granted to heal spells is +2.
• 2nd heal, restoration, restore senses
• 3rd heal, remove disease
Type major staff of healing; Level 12; Price 1,800 gp
The item bonus granted to heal spells is +3.
• 4th heal, restoration
• 5th breath of life, heal, remove disease
Type true staff of healing; Level 16; Price 9,200 gp
The item bonus granted to heal spells is +4.
• 6th heal, restoration, restore senses
• 7th heal, regenerate, remove disease
Craft Requirements Supply one casting of all listed levels
of all listed spells.
STAFF OF ILLUMINATION ITEM 8
EVOCATION MAGICAL STAFF
Price 425 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
This simple iron staff is capped with a faceted, clear gem.
Activate [one-action] Interact; Effect The gem at the top of the
staff glows as a torch, shedding bright light in a 20-foot
radius (and dim light to the next 20 feet) for 10 minutes.
Activate Cast a Spell; Effect You expend a number of charges
from the staff to cast a spell from its list.
• Cantrip light
• 2nd continual flame
• 3rd continual flame, searing light
Craft Requirements Supply one casting of all listed levels
of all listed spells.
STAFF OF ILLUSION ITEM 6+
ILLUSION MAGICAL STAFF
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
This ornately designed metal staff shines with precious inlays
of gold. When you Cast a Spell from the staff, the illusory
image of something you desire flashes across its surface.
While wielding the staff, you gain a +2 circumstance bonus to
checks to identify illusion magic.
Activate Cast a Spell; Effect You expend a number of charges
from the staff to cast a spell from its list.
Type staff of illusion; Level 6; Price 230 gp
• Cantrip ghost sound
• 1st illusory disguise, illusory object
• 2nd illusory creature, item facade, ventriloquism
Type greater staff of illusion; Level 10; Price 900 gp
• 3rd illusory disguise, item facade
• 4th illusory creature, veil
Type major staff of illusion; Level 14; Price 4,000 gp
• 5th illusory scene, veil
• 6th hallucination, mislead
Craft Requirements Supply one casting of all listed levels of
all listed spells.
STAFF OF NECROMANCY ITEM 6+
MAGICAL NECROMANCY STAFF
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
This twisted and grim-looking staff is adorned with hideous
skull and bone motifs. While wielding the staff, you gain a +2
circumstance bonus to checks to identify necromancy magic.
Activate Cast a Spell; Effect You expend a number of charges
from the staff to cast a spell from its list.
Type staff of necromancy; Level 6; Price 230 gp
• Cantrip chill touch
• 1st grim tendrils, ray of enfeeblement
• 2nd deafness, gentle repose
Core Rulebook
594
Type greater staff of necromancy; Level 10; Price 900 gp
• 3rd blindness, vampiric touch
• 4th grim tendrils, enervation
Type major staff of necromancy; Level 14; Price 4,000 gp
• 5th cloudkill, gentle repose
• 6th grim tendrils, vampiric exsanguination
Craft Requirements Supply one casting of all listed levels of
all listed spells.
STAFF OF POWER ITEM 16
RARE EVOCATION MAGICAL STAFF
Price 10,000 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
This staff of magically hardened wood is topped with a silver
sculpture depicting magical runic symbols. When used as a
weapon, a staff of power is a +2 greater striking staff.
Voluntarily destroying a staff of power unleashes an
incredible blast of energy. When wielding the staff, you can
Interact to break it. This releases a 30-foot-burst magical
explosion centered on the staff. This deals 2d8 force damage
per charge remaining in the staff (DC 40 basic Reflex save).
You automatically critically fail your save. A creature reduced
to 0 Hit Points by this damage dies instantly; this is a
death effect.
Activate Cast a Spell; Effect You expend a number of
charges from the staff to cast a spell from its list.
• 1st ray of enfeeblement
• 2nd continual flame
• 3rd levitate
• 4th globe of invulnerability, paralyze
• 5th magic missile
• 6th wall of force
• 7th cone of cold, fireball, lightning bolt
Craft Requirements Supply one casting of all listed levels of
all listed spells.
STAFF OF THE MAGI ITEM 20
RARE EVOCATION MAGICAL STAFF
Price 90,000 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
Sigils and runes of ancient and powerful magic cover the iron
cladding on this long wooden staff. A staff of the magi is a
+3 major striking staff, and when wielding it you gain a +1
circumstance bonus to saving throws against spells.
Voluntarily destroying a staff of the magi unleashes
a truly devastating wave of arcane energy that surges
out, dissipating with distance. When wielding the staff,
you can break it using an Interact action. This releases a
30-foot-burst magical explosion centered on the staff. This
deals 2d10 force damage per charge remaining in the staff
(DC 40 basic Reflex save), You automatically critically fail
your save. The explosion continues to echo beyond the
initial blast zone, dealing half as much damage to creatures
beyond 30 feet but within a 60-foot burst. A creature
reduced to 0 Hit Points by this damage dies instantly; this
is a death effect.
Activate Cast a Spell; Effect You expend a number of charges
from the staff to cast a spell from its list.
• Cantrip detect magic, light, mage hand, telekinetic
projectile
• 1st lock
• 2nd enlarge, glitterdust, invisibility, knock,
telekinetic maneuver, web
• 3rd dispel magic, fireball, lightning bolt
• 4th invisibility, enlarge, fireball, wall of fire, web
• 5th cone of cold, passwall, telekinetic haul
• 6th disintegrate, dispel magic, fireball, lightning bolt
• 7th cone of cold, passwall, plane shift, wall of fire
• 8th fireball, mage armor
• 9th dispel magic, meteor swarm, summon dragon
Craft Requirements Supply one casting of all listed levels of
all listed spells.
STAFF OF TRANSMUTATION ITEM 6+
 MAGICAL STAFF TRANSMUTATION
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
A glass orb atop this metal staff contains fine, undulating sand.
While wielding the staff, you gain a +2 circumstance bonus to
checks to identify transmutation magic.
Activate Cast a Spell; Effect You expend a number of
charges from the staff to cast a spell from its list.
Type staff of transmutation; Level 6; Price 230 gp
• Cantrip sigil
• 1st fleet step, jump
• 2nd enlarge, humanoid form
Type greater staff of transmutation; Level 10; Price 900 gp
• 3rd feet to fins, jump
• 4th gaseous form, shape stone
Type major staff of transmutation; Level 14; Price 4,000 gp
• 5th humanoid transformation
• 6th baleful polymorph, dragon form, flesh to stone
Craft Requirements Supply one casting of all listed levels
of all listed spells.
VERDANT STAFF ITEM 6+
DIVINATION MAGICAL STAFF
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
This oak branch grows leaves in spring that change color in
autumn and shed in winter. While wielding it, you gain a +2
circumstance bonus to Nature checks to identify plants.
Activate Cast a Spell; Effect You expend a number of charges
from the staff to cast a spell from its list.
Type verdant staff; Level 6; Price 225 gp
• Cantrips tanglefoot
• 1st shillelagh (can target the verdant staff)
• 2nd barkskin, entangle, shape wood, tree shape
Type greater verdant staff; Level 12; Price 1,750 gp
• 3rd wall of thorns
• 4th barkskin, speak with plants
• 5th plant form, wall of thorns
Craft Requirements Supply one casting of all listed levels of
all listed spells.
595
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Structures
These items create structures of significant size, typically
by growing from their more manageable, normal forms.
All these items have the structure trait, described in the
sidebar below.
EXPLORER’S YURT ITEM 10
CONJURATION MAGICAL STRUCTURE
Price 880 gp
Bulk 1 (when not activated)
Before activation, this item appears to be nothing more than a
simple rolled-up tent, barely large enough to fit four Medium
creatures. Despite attempts to clean it, the tent is perpetually
smudged with dirt in various places.
Activate (10 minutes) Interact; Frequency once per
day; Effect The rolled-up tent expands into a spacious yurt
complete with a fire pit, 10 bedrolls, various cooking utensils,
and basic food and water.
The yurt can house and feed you and up to nine other
Medium creatures that eat roughly as much as a human does;
they need not attempt a Survival check to Subsist when you
use the yurt. Fires and light inside the yurt do not extend
illumination into the area surrounding the yurt, making it
harder to spot from a distance.
A large loop of red cloth hangs from one wall. If this loop
is pulled, which takes an Interact action, the entire yurt
immediately folds back up into its deactivated form, ready for
further travel.
INSTANT FORTRESS ITEM 16
UNCOMMON CONJURATION MAGICAL STRUCTURE
Price 9,300 gp
Bulk L (when not activated)
This metal cube is small enough to fit in your palm. Close
inspection reveals fine lines in the dark gray metal, as though
the cube were folded thousands of times.
Activate [three-actions] command, Interact; Effect You toss the
cube on the ground, and it immediately unfolds into an
adamantine fortress.
The fortress is 20 feet square and 30 feet high, with adamantine
stairs leading up to three sets of battlements at heights of 10
feet and 20 feet and at the top. Arrow slits along the lower
battlements and crenelations at the top provide standard cover
to anyone within the fortress. There’s no roof, leaving an open,
10-foot-square vertical shaft through the center of the structure.
As a magical structure, the fortress has the structure trait.
Because it expands outward, the fortress can’t catch creatures
inside it as a magical structure normally does. Instead, it pushes
those creatures back. It can’t push a creature into a surface or
hazard this way, and stops expanding if that would happen.
The fortress has a single door in the center of one wall on
the ground level, and the door appears directly in front of
you when you activate the fortress. Provided you’re within
100 feet of the door, you can cause the door to open or slam
shut and lock by spending a single action to issue a verbal
command, which has the auditory trait. The DC to Force Open
the door or Pick its Lock is 40.
You can instantly return the instant fortress to its cube form
by spending a single action to issue a verbal command, which
has the auditory trait. Once deactivated, the fortress can’t be
activated again for 4 hours.
If the fortress becomes damaged, it can be repaired
only with a remake spell or by someone who is legendary
at Crafting.
POCKET STAGE ITEM 5
CONJURATION MAGICAL STRUCTURE
Price 138 gp
Bulk L (when not activated)
This item appears to be a miniature replica of a theater.
It includes a small pocket full of minute set dressing and
costumed paper dolls.
Activate (1 minute) command, envision, Interact; Effect You
place the miniature theater on the ground, filling it with any
set dressing and up to six figures you choose. Then, you tap
a rhythm on the miniature, causing it to grow into a modest
stage 20 feet wide and 15 feet deep. It’s dressed with the
decorations you selected, and simple mannequins wear the
costumes you chose. A wooden proscenium arch frames the
stage, and simple curtains along the sides conceal the wings.
As a magical structure, the stage has the structure trait.
All the stage’s set dressing is illusory and disappears if
taken more than 20 feet from the stage. The costumes are
physical but with illusory embellishments that fade at the
same range, revealing only plain, white smocks.
THE STRUCTURE TRAIT
An item with the structure trait creates a magical building
or other structure when activated. The item must be
activated on a plot of land free of other structures.
The structure adapts to the natural terrain, adopting
the structural requirements for being built there. The
structure adjusts around small features such as ponds or
spires of rock, but it can’t be created on water or other
nonsolid surfaces. If activated on snow, sand dunes, or
other soft surfaces with a solid surface underneath, the
structure’s foundation (if any) reaches the solid ground. If
an item with this trait is activated on a solid but unstable
surface, such as a swamp or an area plagued by tremors,
roll a DC 3 flat check each day; on a failure, the structure
begins to sink or collapse.
The structure doesn’t harm creatures within the area
when it appears, and it can’t be created within a crowd or
in a densely populated area. Any creature inadvertently
caught inside the structure when the item is activated
ends up unharmed inside the complete structure and
always has a clear path of escape. A creature inside the
structure when the activation ends isn’t harmed, and it
lands harmlessly on the ground if it was on an upper level
of the structure.
Core Rulebook
596
Wands
Short, slender items typically made of wood, wands let you
cast a specific spell without expending a spell slot. They can
be used once per day, but can be overcharged to attempt
to cast them again at great risk. Each wand holds a spell
of a certain level, determined when the wand is created.
Cantrips, focus spells, and rituals can’t be placed in wands.
If you find a wand, you can try to figure out what
spell is in it. If the spell is a common spell from your
spell list or is a spell you know, you can use a single
Recall Knowledge action and automatically succeed.
If it’s not, you must Identify Magic (page 238).
Casting Spells from a Wand
A wand contains a spell that can be cast once per day.
Casting a spell from a wand requires holding the wand
in one hand and activating the item with a Cast a Spell
activity using the normal number of actions for the spell.
To cast a spell from a wand, it must be on your spell
list. Because you’re the one casting the spell, use your spell
attack roll and spell DC. The spell is of your tradition.
A spell cast from a wand doesn’t require physical
material components, but you must replace any
material component normally required to cast the spell
with a somatic component. If the spell requires a focus,
you must still have that focus to cast the spell from a
wand, and if the spell has a cost, you must still pay that
cost to cast the spell from a wand.
Overcharging a Wand
After the spell is cast from the wand for the day, you can
attempt to cast it one more time—overcharging the wand
at the risk of destroying it. Cast the Spell again, then roll
a DC 10 flat check. On a success, the wand is broken.
On a failure, the wand is destroyed. If anyone tries to
overcharge a wand when it’s already been overcharged
that day, the wand is automatically destroyed (even if it
had been repaired) and no spell is cast.
Wand Statistics
A wand’s base statistics are the same unless noted
otherwise in a special wand. It has light Bulk, and must
be held in one hand to be activated. Each wand contains
a specific level of the spell. When you activate a wand, you
can only cast the spell at the specified level, but you can
craft a wand with a heightened version of a spell.
Varying Statistics
Each type of wand has a Level and Price determined by the
spell’s level. The wand’s rarity matches the spell’s rarity.
The item’s traits also vary, based on the spell. A wand has
any traits listed in its stat block (usually just magical and
wand), plus any traits of the spell stored on it.
Crafting a Wand
For the most part, the process to Craft a wand is like that to
Craft any other magic item. When you begin the crafting
process, choose a spell to put into the wand. You have
to either cast that spell during the process, or someone
else must do so in your presence. That spell doesn’t have
its normal effects; instead, the magic is captured inside the
wand. The caster doesn’t need to pay any cost of the spell.
The casting must come from a spellcaster expending a
spell slot. You can’t make a wand from a spell that comes
from another magic item, for example.
Magic Wand
The simplest form of wand contains a spell, with Price
and level based on that spell. The wand has the magical
and wand traits, as well as the traits the spell has. The
name of a magic wand with a spell in it is simply “wand
of,” followed by the spell’s name.
MAGIC WAND ITEM 3+
MAGICAL WAND
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
This baton is about a foot long and contains a single spell. The
appearance typically relates to the spell within.
Activate (Cast a Spell); Frequency once per day, plus
overcharge; You Cast the Spell at the indicated level.
Type 1st-level spell; Level 3; Price 60 gp
Type 2nd-level spell; Level 5; Price 160 gp
Type 3rd-level spell; Level 7; Price 360 gp
Type 4th-level spell; Level 9; Price 700 gp
Type 5th-level spell; Level 11; Price 1,500 gp
Type 6th-level spell; Level 13; Price 3,000 gp
Type 7th-level spell; Level 15; Price 6,500 gp
Type 8th-level spell; Level 17; Price 15,000 gp
Type 9th-level spell; Level 19; Price 40,000 gp
Craft Requirements Supply a listed-level casting of the spell.
EXAMPLE MAGIC WAND
This example magic wand has the heal spell.
WAND OF HEAL ITEM 3+
MAGICAL NECROMANCY POSITIVE WAND
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
The golden end caps on this white wooden wand are
adorned with ruby cabochons.
Activate (Cast a Spell); Frequency once per day, plus
overcharge; You cast a heal spell at the indicated level.
Type 1st-level spell; Level 3; Price 60 gp
Type 2nd-level spell; Level 5; Price 160 gp
Type 3rd-level spell; Level 7; Price 360 gp
Type 4th-level spell; Level 9; Price 700 gp
Type 5th-level spell; Level 11; Price 1,500 gp
Type 6th-level spell; Level 13; Price 3,000 gp
Type 7th-level spell; Level 15; Price 6,500 gp
Type 8th-level spell; Level 17; Price 15,000 gp
Type 9th-level spell; Level 19; Price 40,000 gp
Craft Requirements Supply a listed-level casting of heal.
597
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Specialty Wands
Specialty wands can contain only certain kinds of
spells, as noted in the stat block, and either alter the
spell’s effects or affect how it can be cast. The Craft
Requirements entry lists what kinds of spells the
wand can hold.
WAND OF CONTINUATION ITEM 5+
MAGICAL WAND
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
This wand increases a spell’s duration. Yellow embers
spiral over its surface until the spell ends.
Activate (Cast a Spell); Frequency once per day, plus
overcharge; the activation takes [two-actions] if the spell normally
takes [one-action] to cast, or [three-actions] if the spell normally takes [two‑actions];
Effect You Cast the Spell, and its duration is increased
by half.
Type 1st-level spell; Level 5; Price 160 gp
Type 2nd-level spell; Level 7; Price 360 gp
Type 3rd-level spell; Level 9; Price 700 gp
Type 4th-level spell; Level 11; Price 1,400 gp
Type 5th-level spell; Level 13; Price 3,000 gp
Type 6th-level spell; Level 15; Price 6,500 gp
Type 7th-level spell; Level 17; Price 15,000 gp
Type 8th-level spell; Level 19; Price 40,000 gp
Craft Requirements Supply a casting of a spell of the
appropriate level. The spell must have a casting time of
 or [two-actions] and a duration no less than 10 minutes and no
greater than 1 hour.
WAND OF MANIFOLD MISSILES ITEM 5+
EVOCATION FORCE MAGICAL WAND
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
This wand features a carved dragon’s head at its top and a
polished metal sphere set in its midsection.
Activate (Cast a Spell); Frequency once per day, plus
overcharge; Effect You cast magic missile of the indicated
level. After you cast the spell, an additional missile or
missiles are released from the wand at the start of each
of your turns, as though you cast the 1-action version of
magic missile. Choose targets each time. This lasts for
1 minute, until you’re no longer wielding the wand, or
until you try to activate the wand again.
Type 1st-level spell; Level 5; Price 160 gp
Type 3rd-level spell; Level 9; Price 700 gp
Type 5th-level spell; Level 13; Price 3,000 gp
Type 7th-level spell; Level 17; Price 15,000 gp
Craft Requirements Supply a casting of magic missile of
the appropriate level.
WAND OF SLAYING ITEM 16+
ILLUSION MAGICAL WAND
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
This polished black wand has a green gem at the tip, and
anyone who looks into it sees a reflection of a grinning skull
instead of their face.
Activate (Cast a Spell); Frequency once per day, plus
overcharge; Effect You cast finger of death of the indicated
level. If the spell slays its target, the corpse releases negative
energy in a 20-foot emanation, dealing negative damage
equal to double the spell’s level.
Type 7th level spell; Level 16; Price 10,000 gp
Type 8th level spell; Level 18; Price 24,000 gp
Type 9th level spell; Level 20; Price 70,000 gp
Craft Requirements Supply a casting of finger of death of
the appropriate level.
WAND OF SMOLDERING FIREBALLS ITEM 8+
EVOCATION FIRE MAGICAL WAND
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
This blackened, heavily burned stick smells faintly of
bat guano.
Activate (Cast a Spell); Frequency once per day, plus
overcharge; Effect You cast fireball of the indicated
level. Each creature that fails its save takes persistent
fire damage.
Type 3rd-level spell; Level 8; Price 500 gp; Persistent
Damage 1d6
Type 5th-level spell; Level 12; Price 2,000 gp; Persistent
Damage 2d6
Type 7th-level spell; Level 16; Price 10,000 gp; Persistent
Damage 3d6
Type 9th-level spell; Level 20; Price 70,000 gp;
Persistent Damage 4d6
Craft Requirements Supply a casting of fireball of the
appropriate level.
WAND OF WIDENING ITEM 4+
MAGICAL WAND
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
The end of this wand is forked instead of tapered.
Activate (Cast a Spell); Frequency once per day, plus
overcharge; This activation takes [two-actions] if the spell normally
takes [one-action] to cast, or [three-actions] if the spell normally takes [two-actions];
Effect You Cast the Spell, and increase its area. Add 5 feet to
the radius of a burst that normally has a radius of at least 10
feet; add 5 feet to the length of a cone or line that is normally
15 feet long or smaller; or add 10 feet to the length of a larger
cone or line.
Type 1st-level spell; Level 4; Price 100 gp
Type 2nd-level spell; Level 6; Price 250 gp
Type 3rd-level spell; Level 8; Price 500 gp
Type 4th-level spell; Level 10; Price 1,000 gp
Type 5th-level spell; Level 12; Price 2,000 gp
Type 6th-level spell; Level 14; Price 4,500 gp
Type 7th-level spell; Level 16; Price 10,000 gp
Type 8th-level spell; Level 18; Price 24,000 gp
Type 9th-level spell; Level 20; Price 70,000 gp
Craft Requirements Supply a casting of a spell of the
appropriate level. The spell must have a casting time of [one-action]
or [two-actions], can’t have a duration, and must have an area of
burst (10 feet or more), cone, or line.
Core Rulebook
598
Weapons
Weapons can be crafted from precious materials or infused
with magic to grant them powerful and unusual abilities.
Precious Material Weapons
Weapons made of precious materials are more expensive
and sometimes have special effects. You can make metal
weapons out of any of these materials except darkwood,
and wooden weapons out of darkwood. To determine the
Price of 10 pieces of ammunition, use the base Price for a
single weapon, without adding any extra for Bulk.
ADAMANTINE WEAPON ITEM 11+
UNCOMMON
Usage varies by weapon; Bulk varies by
weapon
Adamantine weapons have a shiny black
appearance and cut through lesser items with
ease. They treat any object they hit as if it had half as
much Hardness as usual, unless the object’s Hardness
is greater than that of the adamantine weapon.
Type standard-grade adamantine weapon; Level 11; Price
1,400 gp + 140 gp per Bulk; Craft Requirements at
least 175 gp of adamantine + 17.5 gp per Bulk
Type high-grade adamantine weapon; Level
17; Price 13,500 gp + 1,350 gp per Bulk;
Craft Requirements at least 6,750 gp
of adamantine + 675 gp per Bulk
COLD IRON WEAPON ITEM 2+
Usage varies by weapon; Bulk varies by weapon
Cold iron weapons deal additional damage to creatures with
weakness to cold iron, like demons and fey.
Type low-grade cold iron weapon; Level 2; Price 40 gp + 4 gp
per Bulk; Craft Requirements at least 20 sp of cold iron +
2 sp per Bulk
Type standard-grade cold iron weapon; Level 10; Price 880 gp
+ 88 gp per Bulk; Craft Requirements at least 110 gp of cold
iron + 11 gp per Bulk
Type high-grade cold iron weapon; Level 16; Price 9,000 gp +
900 gp per Bulk; Craft Requirements at least 4,500 gp of
cold iron + 450 gp per Bulk
DARKWOOD WEAPON ITEM 11+
UNCOMMON
Usage varies by weapon; Bulk varies by weapon
Darkwood weapons are as dark as ebony, with a slight purple
tint. A darkwood weapon’s Bulk is reduced by 1 (or to light
Bulk if its normal Bulk is 1, with no effect on a weapon that
normally has light Bulk).
Type standard grade darkwood weapon; Level 11; Price 1,400
gp + 140 gp per Bulk; Craft Requirements at least 175 gp of
darkwood + 17.5 gp per Bulk
Type high-grade darkwood weapon; Level 17; Price 13,500 gp
+ 1,350 gp per Bulk; Craft Requirements at least 6,750 gp
of darkwood + 675 gp per Bulk
MITHRAL WEAPON ITEM 11+
UNCOMMON
Usage varies by weapon; Bulk varies by weapon
Mithral weapons are slightly lighter than silver. A mithral weapon
is 1 Bulk lighter than normal (or light Bulk if its normal Bulk is 1,
with no effect on a weapon that normally has light Bulk).
Type standard-grade mithral weapon; Level 11; Price 1,400 gp
+ 140 gp per Bulk; Craft Requirements at least 175 gp of
mithral + 17.5 gp per Bulk
Type high-grade mithral weapon; Level 17; Price 13,500 gp +
1,350 gp per Bulk; Craft Requirements at least 6,750 gp of
mithral + 675 gp per Bulk
ORICHALCUM WEAPON ITEM 18
RARE
Usage varies by weapon; Bulk
varies by weapon
Orichalcum weapons can have four
magic property runes instead of three.
Due to orichalcum’s temporal properties,
etching the speed weapon property rune onto
an orichalcum weapon costs half the normal Price
(though transferring the rune to a weapon made
of another material requires you to first pay the
remaining Price and then pay the cost to transfer).
Type high-grade orichalcum weapon; Level
18; Price 22,500 gp + 2,250 gp per Bulk;
Craft Requirements at least 11,250 gp of
orichalcum + 1,125 gp per Bulk
SILVER WEAPON ITEM 2+
Usage varies by weapon; Bulk varies by weapon
Silver weapons deal additional damage to creatures with
weakness to silver, like werewolves, and ignore the resistances
of some other creatures, like devils.
Type low-grade silver weapon; Level 2; Price 40 gp + 4 gp
per Bulk; Craft Requirements at least 20 sp of silver + 2
sp per Bulk
Type standard-grade silver weapon; Level 10; Price 880 gp +
88 gp per Bulk; Craft Requirements at least 110 gp of silver
+ 11 gp per Bulk
Type high-grade silver weapon; Level 16; Price 9,000 gp +
900 gp per Bulk; Craft Requirements at least 4,500 gp of
silver + 450 gp per Bulk
Basic Magic Weapon
Many magic weapons are created by etching runes onto
them, as described on page 580. The magic weapon stat
block covers the Prices and attributes of the most common
weapons you can make with only fundamental runes.
MAGIC WEAPON ITEM 2+
EVOCATION MAGICAL
Usage held in 1 hand
A magic weapon is a weapon etched with only fundamental
runes. A weapon potency rune gives an item bonus to attack
599
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
rolls with the weapon, and a striking rune increases the
weapon’s number of weapon damage dice.
The Prices here are for all types of weapons. You don’t need
to adjust the Price from a club to a greataxe or the like. These
weapons are made of standard materials, not precious
materials such as cold iron.
Type +1 weapon; Level 2; Price 35 gp
This weapon has a +1 weapon potency rune (+1 item bonus to
attack rolls with the weapon).
Type +1 striking weapon; Level 4; Price 100 gp
This weapon has a +1 weapon potency rune (+1 item
bonus to attack rolls with the weapon) and a striking
rune (one extra damage die).
Type +2 striking weapon; Level 10; Price 1,000 gp
This weapon has a +2 weapon potency rune (+2 item bonus
to attack rolls with the weapon) and a striking rune (one
additional damage die).
Type +2 greater striking weapon; Level 12; Price 2,000 gp
This weapon has a +2 weapon potency rune (+2 item bonus
to attack rolls with the weapon) and a greater striking rune
(two extra damage dice).
Type +3 greater striking weapon; Level 16; Price 10,000 gp
This weapon has a +3 weapon potency rune (+3 item bonus to
attack rolls with the weapon) and a greater striking rune (two
extra damage dice).
Type +3 major striking weapon; Level 19; Price 40,000 gp
This weapon has a +3 weapon potency rune (+3 item bonus to
attack rolls with the weapon) and a major striking rune (three
extra damage dice).
Specific Magic Weapons
These weapons have abilities far different from
what can be gained by simply etching runes. A
specific magic weapon lists its fundamental runes, which
you can upgrade, add, or transfer as normal. You can’t
etch any property runes onto a specific weapon that it
doesn’t already have.
BLOODLETTING KUKRI ITEM 6
UNCOMMON MAGICAL NECROMANCY
Price 240 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
This +1 striking kukri has a crimson blade that shimmers
eerily in bright light. On a critical hit, the kukri deals
1d8 persistent bleed damage. If the target didn’t already
have persistent bleed damage when you scored the
critical hit, you also gain 1d8 temporary Hit Points.
CATERWAUL SLING ITEM 5
 EVOCATION MAGICAL
Price 155 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Made of shiny brown leather, this +1 striking sling has a single
white thread interwoven into its cord.
Activate [two-actions] Interact (sonic); Frequency once per day;
Effect You pull the white thread free, then whirl the sling in
circles at high speed. It lets out an ear-piercing wave of sound.
Each creature in a 30-foot cone takes 4d6 sonic damage (DC
21 basic Fortitude save). Any creature that fails is deafened
for 1 round, or 1 hour on a critical failure.
DAGGER OF VENOM ITEM 5
MAGICAL NECROMANCY POISON
Price 150 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
The serrated blade of this +1 striking dagger has a greenish
tinge, and the hilt is sculpted to look like the head of a serpent
about to strike. When you critically succeed at an attack roll
with the dagger of venom, the target becomes sickened
1 unless it succeeds at a DC 19 Fortitude save. This is a
poison effect. In addition, you can activate the dagger to
poison a creature with a more potent poison.
Activate [free-action] Interact; Frequency once per day; Trigger
You damage a creature with the dagger of venom; Effect You
poison the creature you hit with dagger venom.
Dagger Venom (poison); Saving Throw Fortitude DC 21;
Maximum Duration 4 rounds. Stage 1 1d8 poison damage
and enfeebled 1.
DWARVEN THROWER ITEM 13
EVOCATION MAGICAL
Price 2,750 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
This +2 striking warhammer is inlaid with precious
metals and decorated with geometric patterns in
a dwarven style. If you’re a dwarf, a dwarven
thrower functions for you as a +2 greater striking
returning warhammer with the thrown 30 feet
trait, and your attacks with the hammer deal 1d8
additional damage against giants.
FIGHTER’S FORK ITEM 3
MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 50 gp
Usage held in 1 or 2 hands; Bulk 1
This +1 trident, usually engraved with a decorative pattern
resembling fish scales, is a common weapon among warriors
of aquatic ancestries.
Activate [one-action] Interact; Effect You extend or shorten the
trident’s haft. When extended, the trident requires two hands
to wield and gains the reach trait, but loses the trident’s
normal thrown trait.
FLAME TONGUE ITEM 13+
EVOCATION FIRE MAGICAL
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
This +2 greater striking flaming longsword has an ornate brass
hilt and a blade shaped like stylized flames. When wielded, the
blade projects illumination resembling shimmering firelight,
emitting dim light in a 10-foot radius.
Activate [two-actions] command, Interact; Effect You cast the
produce flame cantrip from the sword as a 7th-level arcane
Core Rulebook
600
spell, using your melee attack modifier with flametongue as
your spell attack modifier.
Type flame tongue; Level 13; Price 2,800 gp
Type greater flame tongue; Level 17; Price 13,800 gp
This is a +3 greater striking greater flaming longsword. When
you activate the sword to cast produce flame, the spell is
9th level.
Activate [one-action] command; Frequency once per day; Effect A
10-foot emanation of flame radiates from the greater flame
tongue for 1 minute. All weapon and unarmed attacks by you
and your allies within the area gain the effect of the flaming
property rune.
FROST BRAND ITEM 16
COLD EVOCATION MAGICAL
Price 10,000 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk 2
The blade of this +2 greater striking greater frost greatsword
appears to be nothing but icy shards. The frost brand
automatically extinguishes non-magical fires in a 20-foot
emanation. While wielding it, you gain fire resistance 5.
Activate [two-actions] command, Interact; Effect You swing
the frost brand into the area of an ongoing magical fire,
and the blade attempts to counteract the fire with a
counteract modifier of +27. If it fails, it can’t attempt to
counteract the same fire again.
GLOOM BLADE ITEM 9
EVOCATION MAGICAL
Price 700 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
As black as coal, this blade grows more potent
in darkness. While in bright light, it functions
as a +1 shortsword and doesn’t appear to
radiate a magic aura to detect magic or similar
spells unless the spells are 4th level or higher.
In dim light or darkness, the gloom blade becomes a +2
striking shortsword. Whenever you use the gloom blade
to attack a creature you’re undetected by, you deal 1d6
additional precision damage.
To upgrade the gloom blade’s fundamental runes, start
with the base +1 shortsword, but if you improve it beyond
a +2 striking shortsword, the runes apply in dim light or
darkness as well.
HOLY AVENGER ITEM 14
UNCOMMON DIVINE EVOCATION LAWFUL GOOD
Price 4,500 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
The gleaming holy avenger is the iconic weapon of
powerful paladins. The crossbar of this +2 greater striking
holy cold iron longsword is styled to look like angel wings.
Tradition holds that those who see their reflection in a holy
avenger’s highly polished blade have their faults laid bare. If
you are evil, you are enfeebled 2 while carrying or wielding
this weapon.
Activate[two-actions] command, Interact; Frequency
once per hour; Effect You command the sword
and point it at a creature you can see. The
sword casts detect alignment to detect evil, but
this targets only the selected creature instead
of detecting in an area.
Paladin Wielder If you’re a champion of
the paladin cause, you also gain the following
two benefits.
• When you critically hit an evil creature with the
holy avenger, the creature is slowed 1 and enfeebled
2 for 1 round.
• You can activate the sword in the following way.
Activate [one-action] command; Frequency once per day;
Requirements You hit a creature using the
holy avenger on your previous action;
Effect You cast dispel magic at the same
level as your champion focus spells. It must target an
illusion the creature you hit created, a spell affecting
the creature you hit, or an item the creature you hit
wears or carries. The spell or item you attempt to
counteract must be within 120 feet of you.
Craft Requirements You are a champion with the paladin
cause; supply a casting of detect alignment and dispel magic.
The initial raw materials must include 120 gp of cold iron.
LUCK BLADE ITEM 17+
RARE DIVINATION FORTUNE MAGICAL
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Luck and good fortune bless the wielder of this +3 greater
striking shortsword. Luck blades are crafted in a variety of
styles, but their hilts or blades always incorporate
symbols of luck, such as clovers, horseshoes,
fish, ladybugs, or other symbols.
Activate [reaction] envision; Frequency once per day;
Trigger You miss on a Strike with the luck blade; Effect
Reroll the triggering attack roll and use the new result. This
is a fortune effect.
Type luck blade; Level 17; Price 15,000 gp
Type wishing luck blade; Level 19; Price 30,000 gp
Some luck blades contain one wish when crafted. You can
cast this spell as an arcane innate spell while wielding the
luck blade, expending the spell. A spellcaster who can cast
wish can place another wish into the blade by spending
8,000 gp and 4 days of downtime. A wishing luck blade can
hold no more than one wish at a time.
Craft Requirements Supply a casting of wish.
MATTOCK OF THE TITANS ITEM 19
UNCOMMON EVOCATION MAGICAL
Price 36,000 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk 16
This 15-foot-long adamantine digging tool is far too big for
even a Large creature to wield, though if you’re a Small or
larger creature, you can wield it while wearing a belt of
giant strength, as though it were appropriately sized for
601
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
you and had 2 Bulk. The GM might also allow you to wield
the mattock if you have some other means of wielding
oversized weapons, such as if you’re a Large barbarian with
the giant instinct or are a Huge creature. When it’s used as
a weapon, the mattock of the titans has the statistics
of a +3 greater striking keen adamantine
great pick.
While you’re wielding the mattock of
the titans, you gain a +3 item bonus to Athletics
checks. You can use it to loosen or push soft earth at a rate
of 1 minute per 5-foot cube or smash through solid stone at
the rate of 5 minutes per 5-foot-cube.
Activate [two-actions] Interact; Frequency once per day; Effect
You dig furiously with the mattock to non-magically
replicate the effects of an earthquake spell.
Craft Requirements You are a titan, and the initial raw
materials must include 8,100 gp of adamantine.
OATHBOW ITEM 11
DIVINATION MAGICAL
Price 1,300 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 2
Constructed of a flexible, white wood and with
ornate, twisting designs carved into its surface, this
+2 striking composite longbow appears to have been
made by elves. Sometimes when you loose an arrow,
its whistling in flight sounds like a voice whispering
in Elven, wishing for the swift defeat of your enemies.
Activate [one-action] command; Effect You swear an oath to
destroy one creature you can see. For the next 7 days
or until that creature is slain, your attacks with the
bow against that creature deal 1d6 additional damage,
and you gain a +2 circumstance bonus to Survival
checks to Track that creature. Your critical hits against
the target gain the bow’s critical specialization effect
(page 283); if they would already do so, they instead
increase the DC of the Athletics check to Escape when
critically hit to DC 20.
After you activate the bow, you can’t activate it
again for 7 days. If you kill the creature you’ve sworn
an oath against, the oath ends and you need to wait
only 10 minutes before you can activate it again.
RETRIBUTION AXE ITEM 3
ENCHANTMENT MAGICAL
Price 60 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk 2
The blade of this +1 greataxe bears a design of a
human skull. Whenever a creature damages you
with an attack, the skull changes its appearance
to look like the face of that creature. You gain
a +2 circumstance bonus to your next damage
roll against that creature before the end of your next turn.
Because the face reshapes each time you’re damaged, you
get the additional damage only if you attack the creature that
damaged you most recently.
SKY HAMMER ITEM 20
RARE EVOCATION MAGICAL
Price 70,000 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
The sturdy, steel head of this +3 major striking
flaming shock orichalcum warhammer is shaped
like a blazing comet.
Activate [reaction] command; Trigger Your attack roll
with the sky hammer is a critical success; Effect
A 6th-level arcane fireball spell explodes, centered on
the sky hammer. The spell DC is 45. You are immune to the
fireball’s effect, though your allies are not.
Craft Requirements Supply a casting of fireball (6th level),
and the initial raw materials must include 12,375 gp of
orichalcum.
STORM FLASH ITEM 14+
ELECTRICITY EVOCATION MAGICAL
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
This +2 greater striking shock rapier has a golden blade,
and miniature electric arcs flash across its guard while it’s
wielded. When out of its sheath under an open sky, the blade
causes storm clouds to gather slowly above.
Activate[two-actions] command, envision; Frequency once per day;
Effect You cast a 6th-level lightning bolt (DC 33).
Activate [reaction] command; Frequency once per 10 minutes;
Trigger An electricity effect targets you or a creature within
10 feet of you, or has you or a creature within 10 feet of
you in its area; Effect You try to divert the electricity off
course, to be absorbed by storm flash. Choose one eligible
creature to protect and roll a melee attack roll against the
DC of the electricity effect. If you succeed, the chosen
creature takes no electricity damage from the triggering
effect.
Type storm flash; Level 14; Price 4,000 gp
Type greater storm flash; Level 18; Price 21,000 gp
This is a +3 greater striking greater shock rapier. When
activating the sword to cast lightning bolt, the spell
is 8th level.
TWINING STAFF ITEM 6
MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 250 gp
Usage held in 1 or 2 hands; Bulk — to 2
Appearing to be just a small, flat disc made of twigs, this
item can grow and shrink.
Activate [one-action] Interact; Effect You cause the twigs to rapidly
grow or contract, reshaping into a +1 striking staff, a +1 striking
bo staff, or its disc form. In its disc form, it has negligible Bulk
and must be held in one hand to be activated. In the other
forms, it has the same Bulk as a normal weapon of its type. You
can switch your grip as part of the activation.
When you expand the item, you can use the force of the
expansion to High Jump or to try to Force Open a door or the
like by wedging the disc into a gap before activation. The staff
makes the Athletics check with a +15 modifier.
Core Rulebook
602
Worn Items
This section includes magic items you wear. Most have the
invested trait, which means you can wear no more than 10
(page 531). Worn items include the following subcategories,
with special rules appearing at the start of the section.
• Apex Items on this page.
• Companion Items on page 604.
• Other Worn Items on page 604.
Apex Items
When you Invest an Item that has the
apex trait, it improves one of your ability
scores, either increasing it by 2 or to a total of 18,
whichever grants the higher score. This gives you all the
benefits of the new ability score until the investiture runs
out: increasing Intelligence lets you become trained in an
additional skill and learn a new language,
increasing Constitution gives you more
Hit Points, and so on.
An apex item grants this benefit only
the first time it’s invested within a 24-hour
period, and you can benefit from only one
apex item at a time. If you attempt to invest an apex item
when you already have one invested, you don’t
gain the ability score increase, though you
do gain any other effects of Investing
the Item.
ANKLETS OF ALACRITY ITEM 17
 APEX INVESTED MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 15,000 gp
Usage worn anklets; Bulk —
These gem-studded golden anklets give you a +3
item bonus to Acrobatics checks. When you invest the anklets,
you either increase your Dexterity score by 2 or increase it to
18, whichever would give you a higher score.
Activate [one-action] Interact; Frequency once per day; Effect You
click the anklets together, gaining a +20-foot status
bonus to all your Speeds and the effects of
water walk for the next 10 minutes.
BELT OF GIANT STRENGTH ITEM 17
 APEX INVESTED MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 15,000 gp
Usage worn belt; Bulk L
This thick leather belt is decorated with a buckle carved from
glittering quartz in the shape of a fist. You gain
a +3 item bonus to Athletics checks and a
+2 circumstance bonus to Athletics checks
to lift a heavy object, Escape, and Force
Open. When you invest the belt, you either
increase your Strength score by 2 or increase
it to 18, whichever would give you a higher score.
Activate [reaction] Interact; Trigger You are targeted by a thrown
rock attack, or a rock would fall on you; Effect Attempt an
Athletics check to grab the triggering rock. Use the Athletics
DC of the creature throwing the rock, the DC of the hazard
or other effect, or DC 35 if no other DC is applicable. You
must have a free hand to catch the rock, but you can Release
anything you’re holding in a hand as part of this reaction.
Success You safely catch the rock, take no damage, and are
now holding the rock.
Failure You take half damage.
Critical Failure You take full damage.
BELT OF REGENERATION ITEM 17
 APEX INVESTED MAGICAL NECROMANCY
Price 15,000 gp
Usage worn belt; Bulk L
This belt is crafted from rubbery troll hide that’s green and
orange in color. You gain 15 temporary Hit Points the first time
you invest the belt in a day. When you invest the belt, you either
increase your Constitution score by 2 or increase it
to 18, whichever would give you a higher score.
Activate [one-action] Interact; Frequency once per day;
Effect You tighten the belt one notch to gain a
regeneration effect. For 2d4 rounds, at the start of
your turn each round, you recover 15 Hit Points unless
you took acid or fire damage since the start of your previous turn.
CIRCLET OF PERSUASION ITEM 17
 APEX ENCHANTMENT INVESTED MAGICAL
Price 15,000 gp
Usage worn circlet; Bulk —
This elegant silver band often resembles curling
fig leaves and fits around your brow. You gain a
+2 item bonus to Deception and Diplomacy checks.
When you invest the circlet, you either increase
your Charisma score by 2 or increase it to 18,
whichever would give you a higher score.
Activate[two-actions] envision; Frequency once per hour; Effect You
cast a 4th-level charm spell (DC 38).
DIADEM OF INTELLECT ITEM 17
 APEX DIVINATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Price 15,000 gp
Usage worn circlet; Bulk L
An elegant, colorful gem cut into a complex
geometric pattern is slotted into a narrow metal band
that fits around your brow. You gain a +3 item bonus to
checks to Recall Knowledge, regardless of the skill. When you
invest the diadem, you either increase your Intelligence score
by 2 or increase it to 18, whichever would give you
a higher score. This gives you additional trained
skills and languages, as normal for increasing
your Intelligence score. You must select skills
and languages the first time you invest the item,
and whenever you invest the same diadem of
intellect, you get the same skills and languages you
chose the first time.
Activate [one-action] envision; Frequency once per hour; Effect You
gain the effects of hypercognition.
603
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
HEADBAND OF INSPIRED WISDOM ITEM 17
ABJURATION APEX INVESTED MAGICAL
Price 15,000 gp
Usage worn circlet; Bulk —
This simple cloth headband remains pristine and clean at all
times, no matter the circumstances. When you invest the
headband, you either increase your Wisdom score by 2 or
increase it to 18, whichever would give you a higher score.
Activate [one-action] envision; Frequency once per day; Effect When
you are considering a course of action, you get a gut feeling
about whether it’s a good idea. You gain the effects of an
augury spell, except that you receive the
result from your own instincts rather
than an external source.
Activate [reaction] envision (fortune);
Frequency once per hour; Trigger You fail
a saving throw against an effect that makes
you confused, fascinated, or stupefied; Effect The
headband of inspired wisdom clears your mind. You can
reroll the saving throw and use the better result.
Companion Items
You might want to acquire items that benefit an animal
or beast that assists you. These items have the companion
trait, meaning they function only for animal companions,
familiars, and similar creatures. If it’s unclear whether a
creature can benefit from such an item, the GM decides.
Investing Companion Items
Any worn companion item needs to be invested. However,
your companion needs to invest it rather than you
doing so. This requires you to use the Invest an Item
activity alongside your companion. A companion has an
investiture limit of two items (instead of the 10-item limit
a player character has).
BARDING OF THE ZEPHYR ITEM 10
COMPANION INVESTED PRIMAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 900 gp
Usage worn barding; Bulk L
This light barding is covered in stylized wind motifs. When
you suit up your animal companion, the barding adjusts to fit
your animal companion regardless of its shape.
When your companion falls, wind picks it up from below; it
gains the effects of feather fall.
Activate [two-actions] Interact; Frequency once per day; Effect You
trace a finger along the wind motifs on the barding, granting
your companion wearing the barding a fly Speed of 30 feet
for 10 minutes. Even if the companion doesn’t have the mount
special ability, it can still Fly while being ridden.
COLLAR OF EMPATHY ITEM 9
COMPANION DIVINATION INVESTED PRIMAL
Price 600 gp
Usage worn collar (companion) and worn bracelet (you); Bulk 1
This ornate collar of intertwined leather strips of contrasting
colors is paired with a bracelet of a similar construction.
When you wear and invest the bracelet and your companion
wears and invests the collar, you gain a stronger connection
to each other. You and your companion can always sense each
others’ emotional states and basic physical wants and needs.
Activate [one-action] envision; Effect You perceive through your
animal companion’s senses instead of your own. You can Sustain
the Activation. You are unaware of your own surroundings
for as long as you are using your animal companion’s senses.
In addition to the obvious use when you are separated from
your companion, this ability might allow you to notice sounds,
scents, and other stimuli that your companion’s
senses register but yours alone don’t.
COLLAR OF INCONSPICUOUSNESS ITEM 8
COMPANION INVESTED PRIMAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 475 gp
Usage worn collar; Bulk 1
This leather collar’s worn and almost threadbare
look belies its magical nature. When your companion wears and
invests the collar, it gains the ability to change its appearance
from that of a ferocious animal into a more inconspicuous form.
Activate [one-action] envision; Effect You touch your animal
companion to transform it into a nonthreatening Tiny creature
of the same family or a similar creature (for instance, a house
cat instead of a tiger, or a puppy instead of a wolf). This has the
effects of pest form (2nd level, or 4th level if your companion
can fly). The effect lasts until you Dismiss it.
HORSESHOES OF SPEED ITEM 7+
COMPANION INVESTED PRIMAL TRANSMUTATION
Usage worn horseshoes; Bulk 1
When you affix these simple iron horseshoes to the hooves
of an ordinary horse or a quadrupedal animal companion
and the animal companion invests them, that creature
gains a +5-foot item bonus to its land Speed and a +2 item
bonus to Athletics checks to High Jump and Long Jump. In
addition, when it Leaps, it can move 5 feet farther if jumping
horizontally or 3 feet higher if jumping vertically.
Type horseshoes of speed; Level 7; Price 340 gp
Type greater horseshoes of speed; Level 14; Price 4,250 gp
The bonus to Speed is +10 feet, and the bonus to Athletics
checks is +3.
Other Worn Items
These are a wide variety of items you wear. Armor appears
in its own section on page 555, and apex items that can
increase ability scores are on page 603.
AEON STONE ITEM 1+
UNCOMMON INVESTED MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Usage worn; Bulk —
Over millennia, these mysterious, intricately cut gemstones
have been hoarded by mystics and fanatics hoping to
discover their secrets. Despite their myriad forms and
functions, these stones are purportedly all fragments of
Core Rulebook
604
crystal tools used by otherworldly entities to construct the
universe in primeval times.
When you invest one of these precisely shaped crystals, the
stone orbits your head instead of being worn on your body.
You can stow an aeon stone with an Interact action, and an
orbiting stone can be snatched out of the air with a successful
Disarm action against you. A stowed or removed stone remains
invested, but its effects are suppressed until you return it to
orbit your head again.
There are various types of aeon stones, each with
a different shape, color, and magical effect. Each
aeon stone also gains a resonant power when
slotted into a special magical item called a
wayfinder (page 617).
Type clear spindle; Level 7; Price 325 gp
You don’t need to eat or drink while this aeon
stone is invested by you. This aeon stone doesn’t
function until it has been worn continuously for a
week and invested each day therein. If it’s invested by
someone else, this interval starts over.
The resonant power allows you to cast air bubble as a
primal innate spell once per day.
Type dull gray; Level 1; Price 9 gp
A dull gray aeon stone has lost its special magical properties,
sometimes as a result of overusing a tourmaline sphere or
pale lavender ellipsoid aeon stone. It still orbits your head
like any other aeon stone and can thus serve as a stylish,
hands-free option for various spells that target an object, like
continual flame.
Dull gray aeon stones have no resonant power.
Type gold nodule; Level 6; Price 230 gp
When a gold nodule aeon stone is created, its creator chooses
a language they know to store within the crystal. When you
invest the stone, you gain the ability to understand, speak,
and write that language.
The resonant power allows you to cast comprehend
language as an occult innate spell once per day.
Type lavender and green
ellipsoid; Level 19; Price
30,000 gp
This functions as a pale lavender
ellipsoid aeon stone, but it casts an 8thlevel dispel magic spell with a counteract
modifier of +31.
The resonant power allows you to cast detect magic
and read aura as arcane innate spells at will.
Type orange prism; Level 16; Price 9,750 gp
An orange prism aeon stone must be activated to provide a
benefit. The resonant power grants you a +2 item bonus to
Arcana, Nature, Occultism, or Religion checks—whichever
corresponds to the tradition of the last spell you enhanced
with this aeon stone.
Activate [one-action] envision; Effect If your next action is to Cast a
Spell, that spell’s level is 1 higher (maximum 10th level) for the
purposes of counteracting and being counteracted.
Type pale lavender ellipsoid; Level 13; Price 2,200 gp
This aeon stone must be activated to provide a benefit. The
resonant power allows you to cast the read aura cantrip as an
arcane innate spell.
Activate [reaction] envision; Frequency once per day; Trigger A
spell targets you; Effect The stone casts a 6th-level dispel
magic spell in an attempt to counteract the triggering spell,
with a counteract modifier of +22. This can be used only on
spells that specifically target you—not area spells that don’t
have targets. If it succeeds, it counteracts the spell for all
targets if other creatures were targeted in addition to you.
Each time you activate this aeon stone, attempt
a DC 5 flat check. On a failure, the stone
permanently turns into a dull gray aeon stone.
Type pink rhomboid; Level 12; Price 1,900 gp
When you invest this stone, you gain 15
temporary Hit Points. If the stone’s effects are
suppressed, you lose any of the temporary Hit
Points remaining until it returns. The temporary
Hit Points refresh during your daily preparations;
they do not refresh if you re-invest the stone, or
invest another pink rhomboid aeon stone, before then.
The resonant power allows you to cast the stabilize cantrip
as a divine innate spell.
Type tourmaline sphere; Level 7; Price 350 gp
When you would die from the dying condition (typically at
dying 4), this aeon stone automatically activates and reduces
your dying value to 1 less than would normally kill you
(typically to dying 3). The stone then permanently turns into
a dull gray aeon stone. You can benefit from this ability only
once per day, even if you have multiple such stones.
The resonant power allows you to cast 1st-level heal as a
divine innate spell once per day.
ALCHEMIST GOGGLES ITEM 4+
INVESTED MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Usage worn eyepiece; Bulk —
These brass goggles are engraved with flame
patterns and have thick, heavy lenses. While
worn, they give you a +1 item bonus to
Crafting checks to Craft alchemical items
and a +1 item bonus to attack rolls with
alchemical bombs. You can also ignore
lesser cover when making Strikes with
alchemical bombs.
Type alchemist goggles; Level 4; Price 100 gp
Type greater alchemist goggles; Level 11; Price 1,400 gp
The item bonuses are both +2.
Type major alchemist goggles; Level 17; Price 15,000 gp
The item bonuses are both +3.
ARMBANDS OF ATHLETICISM ITEM 9+
INVESTED MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Usage worn armbands; Bulk L
Skilled awl work has imprinted images of a muscled weightlifter
into these tiered leather bands, which grant you enhanced
stamina and skill when performing athletic exercises. While
605
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
fastened to your upper arms, the armbands give you a +2
item bonus to Athletics checks. In addition, whenever you use
an action to Climb or Swim and you succeed at the Athletics
check, add a +5-foot item bonus to the distance you move.
Type armbands of athleticism; Level 9; Price 645 gp
Type greater armbands of athleticism; Level
17; Price 13,000 gp
The bonus to Athletics checks is +3, and the
bonus to a successful check to Climb or Swim
is +10 feet.
BELT OF THE FIVE KINGS ITEM 9
UNCOMMON ENCHANTMENT INVESTED MAGICAL
Price 650 gp
Usage worn belt; Bulk L
Made from interlocking plates of silver and gold,
this heavy belt bears stylized miniature images of five kingly
dwarves. You gain a +1 circumstance bonus to Diplomacy
checks to Make an Impression with dwarves or
make a Request from dwarves. You also gain a +1
circumstance bonus to Intimidation checks against
giants and orcs.
The belt also grants you darkvision and the ability
to understand, speak, and write the Dwarven language.
Activate [one-action] Interact; Frequency once per day;
Requirements You are a dwarf; Effect You tighten the
belt one notch to gain temporary Hit Points equal
to your level and grant allies within 20 feet
of you darkvision. Both effects last for
10 minutes.
BERSERKER’S CLOAK ITEM 12+
INVESTED PRIMAL TRANSMUTATION
Usage worn cloak; Bulk 1
This bearskin includes the head and bared teeth of the mighty
creature from which it was taken. When worn, the cloak
drapes over your head and around your shoulders, imbuing
you with a bear’s ferocity. If you have the Rage action, while
raging you grow jaws that deal 1d10 piercing damage and
claws that deal 1d6 slashing damage and have the agile trait.
This transformation is a morph effect, and both the jaws
and claws are unarmed attacks in the brawling weapon
group. You gain the benefits of a +1 weapon potency rune
and a striking rune with these attacks (gaining a +1
item bonus to attack rolls and increasing the weapon
damage dice by one).
If you have an animal instinct (see the barbarian
on page 82) and the bestial rage instinct ability,
instead of gaining these unarmed attacks, your
unarmed attacks from the bestial rage instinct
ability gain the benefits of a +2 weapon potency
rune and a greater striking rune (granting a +2
item bonus to attack rolls and increasing the weapon
damage dice by two).
Type berserker’s cloak; Level 12; Price 2,000 gp
Type greater berserker’s cloak; Level 19; Price 40,000 gp
You gain the benefits of a +2 weapon potency rune and a
greater striking rune, or a +3 weapon potency rune and a major
striking rune if you have an animal instinct and the bestial
rage instinct ability.
Craft Requirements You are a barbarian with the
animal instinct.
BOOTS OF BOUNDING ITEM 7+
INVESTED MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Usage worn shoes; Bulk L
The springy soles of these sturdy leather
boots cushion your feet and make each step
lighter. These boots give you a +5-foot item
bonus to your Speed and a +2 item bonus to
Athletics checks to High Jump and Long Jump. In
addition, when you use the Leap action, you can move
5 feet further if jumping horizontally or 3  feet higher if
jumping vertically.
Type boots of bounding; Level 7; Price 340 gp
Type greater boots of bounding; Level 14; Price 4,250 gp
The bonus to Speed is +10 feet, and the bonus to High
Jump and Long Jump is +3.
BOOTS OF ELVENKIND ITEM 5+
INVESTED MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Usage worn shoes; Bulk L
These tall, pointed boots are made from soft, supple
black or green leather and are decorated with trim
and buckles of gold. When worn, the boots allow you
to move more nimbly, granting you a +1 item bonus to
Acrobatics checks.
Activate [free-action] envision; Frequency once per hour; Effect
Until the end of your turn, you ignore difficult terrain when
moving on the ground. If you’re wearing a cloak of elvenkind,
you also gain a +5-foot status bonus to your land Speed until
the end of your turn.
Type boots of elvenkind; Level 5; Price 145 gp
Type greater boots of elvenkind; Level 11; Price 1,250 gp
The boots grant a +2 bonus. If you’re also wearing a cloak of
elvenkind, greater boots of elvenkind constantly grant the effects
of pass without trace (DC 30) in forest environments.
BOOTS OF SPEED ITEM 13
 INVESTED MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 3,000 gp
Usage worn shoes; Bulk L
These sleek red boots make your legs feel like
they’re bursting with energy. You gain a +5-foot
item bonus to your land Speed and to any
climb or swim Speeds you have.
Activate [one-action] Interact; Frequency once per day;
Effect You click the heels of the boots together and
gain the quickened condition for 1 minute. You can use the
extra action to Stride, Climb, or Swim. (You must still attempt
an Athletics check for the Climb and Swim actions unless you
have the appropriate movement type.)
Core Rulebook
606
BRACELET OF DASHING ITEM 3
 INVESTED MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 58 gp
Usage worn; Bulk L
This jangling, silvery bracelet makes you
lighter on your feet, giving you a +1 item
bonus to Acrobatics checks.
Activate [one-action] command; Frequency once per
day; Effect You gain a +10-foot status bonus to
Speed for 1 minute.
BRACERS OF ARMOR ITEM 8+
ABJURATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Usage worn bracers; Bulk L
These stiff leather armguards grant you a +1 item bonus
to AC and saving throws, and a maximum Dexterity
modifier of +5. You can affix talismans to bracers of
armor as though they were light armor.
Type I; Level 8; Price 450 gp
Type II; Level 14; Price 4,000 gp
The item bonus to AC and saves is +2.
Type III; Level 20; Price 60,000 gp
The item bonus to AC and saves is +3.
BRACERS OF MISSILE DEFLECTION ITEM 3
ABJURATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Usage worn bracers; Bulk L
These bracers are made from plates of durable mithral and
gleam like the summer sun.
Activate [reaction] Interact; Frequency once per day; Trigger
A ranged weapon attack hits you but doesn’t critically hit;
Requirements You are aware of the attack and not flat-footed;
Effect The bracers send the missile off-course. You gain a +2
circumstance bonus to AC against the triggering attack. If this
would cause the attack to be a failure, the attack misses you.
Type bracers of missile deflection; Level 3; Price 52 gp
Type greater bracers of missile deflection; Level 9; Price 650 gp
You can activate the bracers once every 10 minutes.
BROOCH OF SHIELDING ITEM 2
UNCOMMON ABJURATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Price 30 gp
Usage worn; Bulk —
This piece of silver or gold jewelry is adorned with miniature
images of kite shields and can be used to fasten a cloak or
cape. The brooch automatically absorbs magic missile spells
targeting you. A brooch of shielding can absorb 30 individual
magic missiles before it melts and becomes useless.
Sometimes when found, a brooch of shielding has already
absorbed a number of missiles.
CAPE OF THE MOUNTEBANK ITEM 10
UNCOMMON CONJURATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Price 980 gp
Usage worn cloak; Bulk L
This bright red-and-gold cape is often interlaced with glittery
threads and serves as a distraction. While
wearing the cape, you gain a +2 item bonus to
Deception checks.
Activate [two-actions] Interact; Frequency once per
day; Effect You cast dimension door. The
space you leave and the one you appear in
are filled with puffs of smoke that make
anyone within concealed until they
leave the smoke or the end of your next
turn, at which point the smoke dissipates.
Strong winds immediately disperse the smoke.
CASSOCK OF DEVOTION ITEM 11
DIVINATION DIVINE FOCUSED INVESTED
Price 1,150 gp
Usage worn garment; Bulk L
Each cassock of devotion depicts scenes related
to the domains of a certain deity. It serves as a
religious symbol of that deity, and it doesn’t need
to be wielded to provide that benefit. You gain a
+2 item bonus to Religion checks and a +1 item
bonus to the divine skill of the deity to whom the
cassock is dedicated (as listed on pages 437–440).
Activate [free-action] envision; Frequency once per day; Effect You gain
1 Focus Point, which you can spend only to cast a cleric domain
607
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
spell for a domain belonging to the deity the cassock is dedicated
to. If you don’t spend this Focus Point by the end of this turn, it
is lost.
Craft Requirements You are a cleric who worships the deity
tied to the cassock.
CHANNEL PROTECTION AMULET ITEM 3
UNCOMMON ABJURATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Price 56 gp
Usage worn; Bulk —
This nugget of polished tektite is trapped in a cage of braided
wire and hangs from a silken cord. When wearing this amulet,
you gain resistance 5 against damage from harm spells if
you’re living, or against heal spells if you’re undead.
CHOKER OF ELOCUTION ITEM 6+
ENCHANTMENT INVESTED MAGICAL
Usage worn collar; Bulk L
This platinum choker bears characters from a language’s alphabet,
and it gives knowledge of that language and the associated
culture’s customs. You gain a +1 item bonus to Society checks and
the ability to understand, speak, and write the chosen language.
Your excellent elocution reduces the DC of the flat check to
perform an auditory action while deafened from 5 to 3.
Type choker of elocution; Level 6; Price 200 gp
Type greater choker of elocution; Level 10; Price 850 gp
The item bonus is +2. The choker bears characters from three
languages and grants fluency in all three.
Craft Requirements You know the language or languages the
choker grants.
CLANDESTINE CLOAK ITEM 6+
UNCOMMON ILLUSION INVESTED MAGICAL
Usage worn cloak; Bulk L
When you pull up the hood of this nondescript gray cloak
(an Interact action), you become drab and uninteresting, gaining
a +1 item bonus to Stealth checks and to Deception checks to
Impersonate a forgettable background character, such as a
servant, but also taking a –1 item penalty to Diplomacy and
Intimidation checks.
Activate [two-actions] envision, Interact; Frequency once per day;
Effect You pull the cloak’s hood up and gain the benefits of
nondetection for 1 hour or until you pull the hood back down,
whichever comes first.
Type clandestine cloak; Level 6; Price 230 gp
Type greater clandestine cloak; Level 10; Price 900 gp
The item bonus is +2, and when you activate the cloak, you
gain the benefits of 5th-level nondetection for 8 hours.
CLOAK OF ELVENKIND ITEM 7+
ILLUSION INVESTED MAGICAL
Usage worn cloak; Bulk L
This cloak is deep green with a voluminous hood, embroidered
with gold trim and symbols significant in elven culture. The
cloak allows you to cast the ghost sound cantrip as an arcane
innate spell. When you adjust the cloak’s clasp (an Interact
action), the cloak transforms to match the environment around
you and muffles your sounds, granting you a +1 item bonus to
Stealth checks.
Activate [two-actions] Interact; Frequency once per day; Effect You
draw the hood up and gain the effects of invisibility, with
the spell’s normal duration or until you pull the hood back
down, whichever comes first. If you’re also wearing boots of
elvenkind, you can activate this ability twice per day.
Type cloak of elvenkind; Level 7; Price 360 gp
Type greater cloak of elvenkind; Level 12; Price 1,750 gp
The cloak grants a +2 item bonus, and the effects of 4th-level
invisibility. If you’re also wearing boots of elvenkind, the greater
cloak of elvenkind allows you to Sneak in forest environments
even when creatures are currently observing you.
CLOAK OF THE BAT ITEM 10+
INVESTED MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Usage worn cloak; Bulk L
Core Rulebook
608
Sewn from several long strips of luxurious brown and black
silk, this cloak grants you a +2 item bonus to Stealth checks
as well as to Acrobatics checks to Maneuver in Flight. You can
also use your feet to hang from any surface that can support
your weight, without requiring any check, though you still
must attempt Athletics checks to Climb in order to move
around while inverted.
Activate [two-actions] command, Interact; Frequency once per day;
Effect You can either transform the cloak into bat-like wings
that grant you a fly Speed of 30 feet for 10 minutes, or have
the cloak turn you into a bat by casting a 4th-level pest form
spell on you.
Type cloak of the bat; Level 10; Price 950 gp
Type greater cloak of the bat; Level 17; Price 13,000 gp
The item bonus is +3, and you can activate the cloak any
number of times per day.
COYOTE CLOAK ITEM 3+
DIVINATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Usage worn cloak; Bulk —
This dusty coat is made of mangy brown-and-gray coyote fur.
You gain a +1 item bonus to Survival checks. If you critically
succeed at your Survival check to Subsist, you can feed twice
as many additional creatures.
Type coyote cloak; Level 3; Price 60 gp
Type greater coyote cloak; Level 9; Price 650 gp
The cloak grants a +2 item bonus, and if you critically succeed
at a Survival check to Subsist, you can feed four times as
many additional creatures.
CRAFTER’S EYEPIECE ITEM 3+
INVESTED MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Usage worn eyepiece; Bulk —
This rugged metal eyepiece etched with square patterns
is designed to be worn over a single eye. Twisting the lens
reveals a faint three-dimensional outline of an item you
plan to build or repair, with helpful labels on the component
parts. While worn, this eyepiece gives you a +1 item bonus to
Crafting checks. When you Repair an item, increase the Hit
Points restored by 15 per proficiency rank instead of 10.
Type crafter’s eyepiece; Level 3; Price 60 gp
Type greater crafter’s eyepiece; Level 11; Price 1,200 gp
The eyepiece grants a +2 item bonus and can be activated.
Activate 1 minute (Interact); Frequency once per day; Effect
You calibrate the eyepiece to have it cast a 5th-level creation
spell over the course of 1 minute to construct a temporary item.
DANCING SCARF ITEM 3+
ILLUSION INVESTED MAGICAL VISUAL
Usage worn belt; Bulk —
This long and billowing scarf is typically woven of silk or sheer
fabric and adorned with bells or other jangling bits of shiny
metal. It grants a +1 item bonus to Performance checks to dance.
Activate [one-action] Interact; Requirements On your most recent
action, you succeeded at a Performance check to dance; Effect
You become concealed until the beginning of your next turn.
Type dancing scarf; Level 3; Price 60 gp
Type greater dancing scarf; Level 9; Price 650 gp
The scarf grants a +2 bonus. When you activate the scarf, you
can also Stride up to half your Speed or Step.
DAREDEVIL BOOTS ITEM 10+
ABJURATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Usage worn shoes; Bulk L
These brightly colored, soft-soled boots motivate you to perform
risky stunts and grant you the agility to succeed. The boots grant
you a +2 item bonus to Acrobatics checks and a +1 circumstance
bonus to checks to Tumble Through an enemy’s space.
The boots can grip solid surfaces and help you avoid a fall,
allowing you to use the Grab an Edge reaction even if your
hands aren’t free. You treat falls as 10 feet shorter or, if you
have the Cat Fall feat, treat your proficiency rank in Acrobatics
as one degree better to determine the benefits of that feat. If
you have Cat Fall and are already legendary in Acrobatics, you
can choose the speed of your fall, from 60 feet per round up
to normal falling speed.
Type daredevil boots; Level 10; Price 900 gp
Type greater daredevil boots; Level 17; Price 14,000 gp
The bonus to Acrobatics checks is +3, and the bonus to Tumble
Through is +2. The boots can be activated.
Activate[two-actions] command; Frequency once per day; Effect The
boots cast freedom of movement on you.
DEMON MASK ITEM 4+
ENCHANTMENT INVESTED MAGICAL
Usage worn mask; Bulk L
This terrifying mask is crafted in the visage of a leering demon
and grants a +1 item bonus to Intimidation checks.
Activate [two-actions] Interact; Frequency once per day; Effect The
mask casts a fear spell with a DC of 20.
Type demon mask; Level 4; Price 85 gp
Type greater demon mask; Level 10; Price 900 gp
The mask grants a +2 item bonus. It casts 3rd-level fear with
a DC of 29.
DIPLOMAT’S BADGE ITEM 5
ENCHANTMENT INVESTED MAGICAL
Price 125 gp
Usage worn; Bulk —
When displayed prominently, this brass badge makes
creatures find you more agreeable. You gain a +1 item bonus
to Diplomacy checks.
Activate [one-action] Recall Knowledge; Frequency once per day;
Effect Attempt a DC 20 check to Recall Knowledge about people
of a human ethnicity, a non-human ancestry, or some other
type of creature. (The GM determines what your options are.) If
you succeed, the badge’s bonus increases to +2 for Diplomacy
checks with creatures of that group for the rest of the day.
DOUBLING RINGS ITEM 3+
EVOCATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Usage worn; Bulk —
609
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
This item consists of two magically linked rings: an
intricate, gleaming golden ring with a square-cut ruby, and
a thick, plain iron ring. When you wield a melee weapon in
the hand wearing the golden ring, the weapon’s fundamental
runes are replicated onto any melee weapon you
wield in the hand wearing the iron ring. (The
fundamental runes are weapon potency
and striking, which add an item bonus
to attack rolls and extra weapon
damage dice, respectively.) Any
fundamental runes on the
weapon in the hand wearing
the iron ring are suppressed.
The replication functions only
if you wear both rings, and it ends as
soon as you cease wielding a melee weapon in
one of your hands. Consequently, the benefit
doesn’t apply to thrown attacks or if you’re
holding a weapon but not wielding it
(such as holding in one hand a weapon
that requires two hands to wield).
Type doubling rings; Level 3; Price 50 gp
Type greater doubling rings; Level 11; Price
1,300 gp
The rings also replicate property runes from the weapon in
the gold-ringed hand, so long as the weapon in the iron-ringed
hand meets all the prerequisites for a given rune and is not
a specific weapon. The weapon in the iron-ringed hand gains
the benefits of those runes. All its own runes are suppressed.
When you invest the rings, you can elect for the rings to
transfer only fundamental runes, in which case they function
as standard doubling rings.
DREAD BLINDFOLD ITEM 17
EMOTION ENCHANTMENT FEAR INVESTED MAGICAL MENTAL
Price 15,000 gp
Usage worn eyepiece; Bulk —
When tied over your eyes, this ragged strip of black linen
gives you a +3 item bonus to Intimidation checks and
darkvision. You can see through the blindfold, but only
using darkvision.
The first time a particular creature sees you in a day, it
must succeed at a DC 37 Will save or be frightened 1. This
is an emotion, fear, and mental effect, and your allies become
immune to it after about a week.
Activate [free-action] command; Frequency once per
minute; Trigger You damage a creature with a
Strike; Effect Your target is gripped by intense
fear. This has the effect of a DC 37 phantasmal
killer spell, but it is an enchantment instead
of an illusion. The creature is then temporarily immune for
24 hours.
DRUID’S VESTMENTS ITEM 10
FOCUSED INVESTED PRIMAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 1,000 gp
Usage worn garment; Bulk L
This brown-and-green tunic is embroidered with patterns that
resemble interlocking elk antlers. You gain a +2 item bonus to
Nature checks.
Activate [free-action] envision; Frequency once per day; Effect You
gain 1 Focus Point, which you can spend only to cast an
order spell. If you don’t spend this Focus Point by the
end of this turn, it is lost.
Craft Requirements You are a druid.
EYE OF FORTUNE ITEM 13
DIVINATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Price 2,700 gp
Usage worn eyepiece; Bulk —
Adherents of Erastil, god of the hunt, create
these magical eye patches. An eye of fortune has
a jeweled eye symbol on its front, allowing you to
magically see through the eye patch as though it
were transparent.
Activate [free-action] envision (fortune); Trigger You
attack a concealed or hidden creature and
haven’t attempted the flat check yet; Effect You
can roll the flat check for the concealed or hidden
condition twice and use the higher result.
EYES OF THE EAGLE ITEM 9
INVESTED MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 700 gp
Usage worn eyepiece; Bulk —
These lenses of amber crystal fit over your eyes. They grant
you low-light vision and a +2 item bonus to Perception checks
that involve sight.
GLOVES OF STORING ITEM 7
UNCOMMON EXTRADIMENSIONAL INVESTED MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 340 gp
Usage worn gloves; Bulk —
An item can be stored inside these supple leather gloves, held
in an extradimensional space. When an item is inside the
glove, an image of the item appears as a simple,
stitched pattern on the back of each glove.
Many gloves of storing are found with an item
already inside.
Activate [one-action] Interact; Requirements No item
is stored in the gloves; Effect One item you’re
holding with a Bulk of 1 or less vanishes into the gloves’
extradimensional space.
Activate [free-action] Interact; Requirements An item is stored
in the gloves, and you have a free hand; Effect The item
stored in the gloves appears in your hand. The gloves can’t be
activated again for 1 minute.
GOGGLES OF NIGHT ITEM 5+
INVESTED MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Usage worn eyepiece; Bulk —
The opaque crystal lenses of these sleek goggles do not
Core Rulebook
610
obscure vision, but rather enhance it. While wearing the
goggles, you gain a +1 item bonus to Perception checks
involving sight.
Activate [one-action] Interact; Frequency once per day; Effect
Rotating the lenses 90 degrees, you gain darkvision for
1 hour.
Type goggles of night; Level 5; Price 150 gp
Type greater goggles of night; Level 11; Price
1,250 gp
The item bonus is +2, and the darkvision lasts
until you rotate the lenses back or the item is
no longer invested by you, whichever comes first.
Type major goggles of night; Level 18; Price 20,000 gp
The item bonus is +3, and the goggles grant greater darkvision,
which lasts until you rotate the lenses back or the item is no
longer invested by you, whichever comes first.
GORGET OF THE PRIMAL ROAR ITEM 11
ENCHANTMENT INVESTED MAGICAL
Price 1,250 gp
Usage worn collar; Bulk L
This engraved darkwood gorget seems to vibrate with
ferocity, granting you a +2 item bonus to
Intimidation checks.
Activate [one-action] command; Frequency
once during the duration of each
polymorph effect; Requirements You’re in a
non-humanoid form via a polymorph effect;
Effect You unleash a bestial roar, attempting
a single Intimidation check compared to the
Will DCs of all enemies within 30 feet to impose
the effects below. Though this activation has the
command component, you can issue this command
without the need for language.
Critical Success The creature is frightened 2.
Success The creature is frightened 1.
Failure The creature is unaffected.
HAND OF THE MAGE ITEM 2
EVOCATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Price 30 gp
Usage worn; Bulk L
This mummified elf hand hangs on a golden chain, its gnarled
fingers locked in a peculiar pattern.
Activate[two-actions] command, envision; Effect You cast mage hand.
HANDWRAPS OF MIGHTY BLOWS ITEM 2+
INVESTED MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Usage worn gloves; Bulk —
As you invest these embroidered strips of cloth, you must
meditate and slowly wrap them around your hands. These
handwraps have weapon runes etched into them to give your
unarmed attacks the benefits of those runes, making your
unarmed attacks work like magic weapons. For example, +1
striking handwraps of mighty blows would give you a +1 item
bonus to attack rolls with your unarmed attacks and increase
the damage of your unarmed attacks from one weapon die
to two (normally 2d4 instead of 1d4, but if your fists have
a different weapon damage die or you have other unarmed
attacks, use two of that die size instead).
You can upgrade, add, and transfer runes to and
from the handwraps just as you would for a
weapon, and you can attach talismans to the
handwraps. Treat the handwraps as melee
weapons of the brawling group with light Bulk
for these purposes. Property runes apply only
when they would be applicable to the unarmed
attack you’re using. For example, a property that
must be applied to a slashing weapon wouldn’t function when
you attacked with a fist, but you would gain its benefits if you
attacked with a claw or some other slashing unarmed attack.
The entries below list the most typical combinations of
fundamental runes.
Type +1 handwraps of mighty blows; Level 2; Price 35 gp
Type +1 striking handwraps of mighty blows; Level 4; Price
100 gp
Type +2 striking handwraps of mighty blows; Level 10;
Price 1,000 gp
Type +2 greater striking handwraps of mighty blows; Level 12;
Price 2,000 gp
Type +3 greater striking handwraps of mighty blows; Level 16;
Price 10,000 gp
Type +3 major striking handwraps of mighty blows;
Level 19; Price 40,000 gp
HAT OF DISGUISE ITEM 2+
ILLUSION INVESTED MAGICAL
Usage worn headwear; Bulk —
This ordinary-looking hat allows you to cloak
yourself in illusions.
Activate 1 minute (Interact); Frequency once per day;
Effect The hat casts a 1st-level illusory disguise spell on you.
While setting up the disguise, you can magically alter the hat
to appear as a comb, ribbon, helm, or other piece of headwear.
Type hat of disguise; Level 2; Price 30 gp
Type greater hat of disguise; Level 7; Price 340 gp
You can activate the hat as a 2-action activity, you can
activate it any number of times per day, and the illusory
disguise is 2nd level.
HAT OF THE MAGI ITEM 3+
ARCANE CONJURATION INVESTED
Usage worn headwear; Bulk —
This hat comes in many forms, such as a colorful turban or
a pointy hat with a brim, and can bear symbols or runes. It
grants you a +1 item bonus to Arcana checks and allows you
to cast the prestidigitation cantrip as an arcane innate spell.
Type hat of the magi; Level 3; Price 50 gp
Type greater hat of the magi; Level 9; Price 650 gp
This larger, fancier hat grants a +2 bonus and can be activated.
Activate[three-actions] Cast a Spell; Frequency once per day; Effect
You cast a 4th-level arcane summon elemental spell.
611
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
HEALER’S GLOVES ITEM 4+
INVESTED MAGICAL NECROMANCY
Usage worn gloves; Bulk L
These clean, white gloves never show signs of blood, even
when used to stitch up wounds or treat other ailments. They
give you a +1 item bonus to Medicine checks.
Activate [one-action] Interact; Frequency once
per day; Effect You can soothe a willing,
adjacent creature’s wounds, restoring 2d6+7
Hit Points to that creature. This is a positive
healing effect. You can’t harm undead with
this healing.
Type healer’s gloves; Level 4; Price 80 gp
Type greater healer’s gloves; Level 9;
Price 700 gp
The gloves provide a +2 bonus and restore
4d6+15 Hit Points.
INEXPLICABLE APPARATUS ITEM 18
INVESTED MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 19,000 gp
Usage worn garment; Bulk 2
This strange and intricate harness fits snugly to the torso.
Once you invest the apparatus, numerous artificial limbs with
various tools, clamps, and lenses whirl into action, following
your mental commands effortlessly.
When using this apparatus, you gain a +3 item bonus
to Crafting checks to Craft, Earn Income, and Repair, and
you reduce the minimum time required to Craft an item to
1 day. If you succeed at your Crafting check and spend more
downtime to continue work on the item after the minimum
number of days, each day you spend reduces the remaining
raw material cost by an amount based on your level + 1 and
your proficiency rank in Crafting; on a critical success, each
day reduces the remaining raw material cost by an amount
based on your level + 2 and your proficiency rank. If you are
20th level, on a critical success your progress is 50 gp, 100
gp, 200 gp, or 350 gp for trained, expert, master, or legendary
proficiency, respectively.
Activate [two-actions] command, Interact; Frequency once per day;
Effect You command the apparatus to magically jury-rig an item
you hold or that’s within 5 feet of you. The item is repaired,
as a 3rd-level mending spell. This lasts for 10 minutes, after
which the item returns to its previous state of disrepair unless
you’ve Repaired it before then.
KNAPSACK OF HALFLINGKIND ITEM 9+
UNCOMMON CONJURATION EXTRADIMENSIONAL HEALING INVESTED MAGICAL
Usage worn backpack; Bulk L
This sturdy leather satchel contains three compartments
fastened with large clasps. The first compartment is lined in
blue satin and contains an extradimensional space equivalent
to a type II bag of holding.
The second compartment has no lining. You can pull forth
cookware and cooking utensils from it. Once they have been
used to prepare a meal, the items transform into plates and
silverware, and they evaporate once the meal has been eaten,
taking any leftovers with them. The cookware reappears
cleaned in the compartment 1 hour later. The compartment
provides only kitchenware, not any food.
The third compartment is lined
with plush purple velvet and
contains berry tarts wrapped in
parchment paper. A creature can unwrap
and eat one tart with an Interact action
to regain 2d8+4 Hit Points. The knapsack
produces four tarts per day, which appear
at breakfast time. Any tarts not eaten by
the end of the day evaporate.
Type knapsack of halflingkind; Level 9;
Price 675 gp
Type greater knapsack of halflingkind; Level
13; Price 2,850 gp
The berry tarts each restore 4d8+8 Hit Points,
and the bag has two additional compartments,
each of which can be Activated with an Interact action.
The fourth compartment is lined in golden velvet. Once
per day, you can draw a lucky magic sling bullet from this
compartment. If you attack with this sling bullet, you roll twice
and use the better result on your attack roll and your damage
roll. This is a fortune effect. The stone becomes non-magical
if not hurled by the end of your turn. Once activated, this
compartment stitches itself shut until the next day.
The bag’s fifth compartment is lined in black wool. Once per
day, you can unfold this compartment into a 5-foot-diameter
portal on the ground. The first person to Step into the portal
from an adjacent square is teleported away. This has the same
effect as an 5th-level dimension door spell, except the affected
creature takes the knapsack with them. When the portal is
used, or at the start of your next turn if it hasn’t been used,
Core Rulebook
612
the compartment closes automatically and can’t be unfolded
until the next day.
LIFTING BELT ITEM 4
INVESTED MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 80 gp
Usage worn belt; Bulk L
This wide leather belt grants you a +1 item bonus
to Athletics checks and increases the amount
you can easily carry. You can carry Bulk equal to
6 + your Strength modifier before becoming
encumbered, and you can hold and carry a
total Bulk up to 11 + your Strength modifier.
Activate [two-actions] Interact; Effect You lift an
object of up to 8 Bulk as though it were
weightless. This requires two hands, and if
the object is locked or otherwise held in place,
you can attempt to Force it Open using Athletics
as part of this activation. The object still has its full
weight and Bulk for all other purposes—you just ignore that
weight. The effect lasts until the end of your next turn.
MESSENGER’S RING ITEM 9+
ENCHANTMENT INVESTED MAGICAL
Usage worn; Bulk —
This silver signet ring changes to match the insignia of a lord
or organization you serve (or your own face, if you serve no
one else). It grants you a +2 item bonus to
Diplomacy checks and lets you cast message
as an arcane innate spell at will.
Activate 1 minute (envision); Frequency once
per day; Effect The ring casts animal messenger
to your specification. The animal is a
magical creature that springs from the ring,
and its appearance suits the iconography
or heraldry of the lord or organization
represented by the ring.
Type messenger’s ring; Level 9; Price 700 gp
Type greater messenger’s ring; Level 17; Price 13,500 gp
The ring grants a +3 bonus and can be activated in an
additional way.
Activate[three-actions] command; Frequency once per hour; Effect
The ring casts sending to your specifications.
NECKLACE OF FIREBALLS ITEM 5+
EVOCATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Usage worn; Bulk —
This string of beads appears to be a hemp string with lustrous
red beads of various sizes hanging from it. When activated,
it briefly appears in its true form: a golden chain with golden
spheres attached by fine threads.
Numerous varieties of the necklace of fireballs exist. Each
has a different basic Reflex save DC and includes a combination
of spheres dealing different amounts of damage, as listed for
each type below. When all the beads are gone, the necklace
becomes a non-magical hemp string.
Activate [one-action] Interact; Effect You detach a sphere from the
necklace, causing it to glow with orange light. After you
activate a sphere, if you or anyone else hurls it (an Interact
action with the ranged trait), it detonates as a fireball where it
lands. Your toss can place the center of the fireball anywhere
within 70 feet, though at the GM’s discretion you might
need to make an attack roll if the throw is unusually
challenging. If no one hurls the sphere by the start of
your next turn, it turns into a non-magical red bead.
Type I; Level 5; Price 44 gp
One 6d6, two 4d6 (DC 21)
Type II; Level 7; Price 115 gp
One 8d6, one 6d6, two 4d6 (DC 25)
Type III; Level 9; Price 300 gp
One 10d6, two 8d6, two 6d6 (DC 27)
Type IV; Level 11; Price 700 gp
One 12d6, two 10d6, three 8d6 (DC 30)
Type V; Level 13; Price 1,600 gp
One 14d6, two 12d6, four 10d6 (DC 32)
Type VI; Level 15; Price 4,200 gp
One 16d6, three 14d6, four 12d6 (DC 36)
Type VII; Level 17; Price 9,600 gp
One 18d6, three 16d6, five 14d6 (DC 39)
PENDANT OF THE OCCULT ITEM 3+
DIVINATION INVESTED OCCULT
Usage worn; Bulk —
This amulet is hollow and shaped in the form of an
unblinking eye. Its cavity typically holds some fragment
of occult text. While wearing the pendant, you gain a
+1 item bonus to Occultism checks, and you can cast the
guidance cantrip as an occult innate spell.
Type pendant of the occult; Level 3; Price 60 gp
Type greater pendant of the occult; Level 9;
Price 650 gp
The pendant grants a +2 item bonus and
can be activated.
Activate 10 minutes (Cast a Spell); Frequency
once per day; Effect You cast a 4th-level dream
message spell.
PERSONA MASK ITEM 3+
FORTUNE ILLUSION INVESTED MAGICAL
Usage worn mask; Bulk —
Despite covering the entire face, this alabaster mask does
not hinder vision or other senses. Wearing the mask grants
a +1 item bonus to Performance checks while acting, orating,
performing comedy, or singing.
Activate [one-action] envision; Effect You change the mask’s
appearance into an artistic rendition of a dramatic character
of your choice.
Type persona mask; Level 3; Price 50 gp
Type greater persona mask; Level 9; Price 650 gp
The mask grants a +2 bonus and can be activated.
Activate [reaction] envision (fortune); Frequency once per day;
Trigger You fail a Performance check that benefits from the
613
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
mask’s bonus; Effect You change the mask’s character and
reroll the Performance check, using the second result.
PHYLACTERY OF FAITHFULNESS ITEM 9+
DIVINATION DIVINE INVESTED
Usage worn circlet; Bulk L
This tiny box holds a fragment of religious scripture
sacred to a particular deity. The box is worn by affixing
it to a leather cord and tying it around your head
just above your brow. You don’t gain any benefit
from the phylactery if you don’t worship the
affiliated deity. The phylactery grants you
religious wisdom, which manifests as a +2
item bonus to Religion checks. Just before you
perform an action that would be anathema to the
phylactery’s deity, the phylactery warns you of the
potential transgression in time for you to change
your mind.
Activate [one-action] envision; Frequency once per day; Effect You
ask for guidance about a particular course of action, gaining
the effects of an augury spell.
Type phylactery of faithfulness; Level 9; Price 680 gp
Type greater phylactery of faithfulness; Level 17; Price
13,000 gp
The phylactery grants a +3 item bonus, and you can activate
it once every 30 minutes.
Craft Requirements You worship the phylactery’s deity.
RING OF CLIMBING ITEM 12
INVESTED MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 1,750 gp
Usage worn; Bulk —
Claw-like prongs on his thick golden band bears extend to
dig deep into sheer surfaces when you are Climbing. This
ring grants you a climb Speed equal to half your land Speed.
Penalties to your Speed (including those from your armor)
apply before halving.
RING OF COUNTERSPELLS ITEM 10
UNCOMMON ABJURATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Price 925 gp
Usage worn; Bulk —
This ornate silver ring bears two competing geometric designs
of brightly colored and wildly clashing inlaid gemstones. A
spellcaster can cast a single spell into this ring as long as no
spell is currently stored within, expending the normal time,
costs, and so forth to Cast the Spell. The spell’s effect doesn’t
occur; the spell’s power is instead stored within the ring.
When you invest a ring of counterspells, you immediately
know the name and level of the spell stored inside, if any. A
ring of counterspells found as treasure has a 50% chance of
having a spell stored in it. The GM determines that spell.
Activate [reaction] envision; Trigger You are targeted by or within
the area of the spell stored within the ring; Effect You can
attempt to counteract the triggering spell, using the level of
the spell stored in the ring and a counteract modifier of +19.
Once you do, the stored spell’s energy is spent, and the ring
is empty.
Activate [one-action] command; Effect You harmlessly expend the
stored spell, having no effect but emptying the ring so that
another spell can be cast into it.
RING OF ENERGY RESISTANCE ITEM 6+
ABJURATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Usage worn; Bulk —
This ring grants you resistance 5 against one
type of energy damage: acid, cold, electricity,
fire, or sonic. Each ring is crafted to protect
against a particular type of energy damage,
and its design usually embodies the type of
energy it protects the wearer from in some
way. For instance, a ring of fire resistance might be
capped with a ruby, whereas a ring of cold resistance
features a sapphire instead.
Type ring of energy resistance; Level 6; Price 245 gp
Type greater ring of energy resistance; Level 10; Price 975 gp
The ring grants resistance 10.
Type major ring of energy resistance; Level 14; Price 4,400 gp
The ring grants resistance 15.
RING OF LIES ITEM 10
UNCOMMON ENCHANTMENT INVESTED MAGICAL
Price 850 gp
Usage worn; Bulk —
This plain silver ring has an almost oily sheen. While wearing
the ring, you gain a +2 item bonus to Deception checks.
Activate [two-actions] Interact; Effect Snapping your fingers on the
hand that wears the ring causes the ring to cast glibness on
you with no visual manifestations of a spell being cast.
RING OF MANIACAL DEVICES ITEM 11+
DIVINATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Usage worn; Bulk —
This ring seems like simple tarnished brass, but it enhances
your curiosity about traps and devices of all kinds. You can
use an Interact action to pull a set of thieves’ tools from the
ring. These tools appear in your hand and fold back into the
ring if they would leave your possession. They grant you a +2
item bonus to Thievery checks to Disable a Device and to Pick
a Lock, and the ring’s insights grant you the same bonus to
Crafting checks to Craft and Repair snares and traps.
Activate 10 minutes (Interact); Frequency once per day;
Effect You create a 4th-level glyph of warding containing
fireball. You can have only one glyph of warding from a
ring of maniacal devices active at a time, even if you have
multiple rings, and the spell ends if you lose your investiture
in the ring.
Type ring of maniacal devices; Level 11; Price 1,175 gp
Type greater ring of maniacal devices; Level 18; Price 4,250 gp
The ring grants a +3 bonus. Activating it creates an 8th-level
glyph of warding containing your choice of either prismatic
spray or 7th-level fireball.
Core Rulebook
614
RING OF SPELL TURNING ITEM 20
RARE ABJURATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Price 67,000 gp
Usage worn; Bulk —
This golden ring has three diamonds set into its face.
Activate [reaction] envision; Trigger You are targeted
by a spell; Effect The ring replicates the effects
of an 8th-level spell turning with a counteract
modifier of +35, possibly causing the triggering
spell to reflect back on its caster. The ring can
reflect no more than 9 total levels of spells per
day. If you activate the ring to reflect a spell
that would exceed this limit, the attempt fails,
but the attempted usage of the ring does not count
toward the daily limit.
RING OF SUSTENANCE ITEM 7
UNCOMMON CONJURATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Price 325 gp
Usage worn; Bulk —
This polished wooden ring constantly refreshes your
body and mind. You don’t need to eat or drink
while wearing it, and you need only 2 hours of
sleep per day to gain the benefits of 8 hours of
sleep. A ring of sustenance doesn’t function until
it’s been worn and invested continuously for a
week. Removing it resets this interval.
RING OF SWIMMING ITEM 12
INVESTED MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 1,750 gp
Usage worn; Bulk —
This blue metal ring grants you a swim Speed equal to half
your land Speed. Penalties to your Speed (including from your
armor) apply before halving.
RING OF THE RAM ITEM 6+
EVOCATION FORCE INVESTED MAGICAL
Usage worn; Bulk —
This heavy iron ring is shaped to look like the head of a ram,
with curling horns.
Activate [one-action] or more (Interact); Frequency once per minute;
Effect A ram-shaped blast of force slams into one foe that you
can see within 60 feet. The number of actions you spend to
Activate this Item (from 1 to 3) determines the intensity of
the force. The blow deals 2d6 force damage per action spent
and pushes the target 5 feet per action spent. The target must
attempt a DC 22 Fortitude save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target takes half damage and is pushed half
the distance.
Failure The target takes full damage and is pushed the
full distance.
Critical Failure The target takes double damage and is pushed
twice the distance.
Type ring of the ram; Level 6; Price 220 gp
Type greater ring of the ram; Level 13; Price 2,700 gp
The ring deals 3d6 force damage per action spent, and the
save DC is 32. When you activate the ring using 3 actions, you
can disperse the force into multiple magical rams, targeting
all creatures in a 30-foot cone instead of one target within
60 feet.
RING OF WIZARDRY ITEM 7+
UNCOMMON ARCANE DIVINATION INVESTED
Usage worn; Bulk —
This ring is made from the purest platinum and
is covered in esoteric arcane symbols. It does
nothing unless you have a spellcasting class feature
with the arcane tradition. While wearing the ring of
wizardry, you gain a +1 item bonus to Arcana checks and
have two additional 1st-level arcane spell slots each day. You
prepare spells in these slots or cast from them spontaneously,
just as you normally cast your spells.
If you take off the ring for any reason, you lose the
additional spell slots. You can’t gain spell slots from more
than one ring of wizardry per day, nor can a single
ring of wizardry grant spell slots more than once
per day.
If you can cast arcane spells in a variety of
different ways (such as if you are a draconic
bloodline sorcerer with the wizard multiclass
archetype), you can divide the spell slots as you
wish among your various sources of arcane spells.
Type I; Level 7; Price 360 gp
Type II; Level 10; Price 1,000 gp
The bonus is +2, and the ring grants two 2nd-level spell slots
and one 1st-level spell slot.
Type III; Level 12; Price 2,000 gp
The bonus is +2, and the ring grants two 3rd-level spell slots
and one 2nd-level spell slot.
Type IV; Level 14; Price 4,500 gp
The bonus is +2, and the ring grants two 4th-level spell slots
and one 3rd-level spell slot.
Craft Requirements You have a spellcasting class feature with
the arcane tradition.
ROBE OF EYES ITEM 17
UNCOMMON DIVINATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Price 13,000 gp
Usage worn garment; Bulk 1
This garment appears to be an ordinary robe until donned, at
which point numerous strange and alien eyes of varied shapes
and colors open and blink across its fabric. While wearing the
robe, you gain a +3 item bonus to Perception checks, and
you constantly benefit from the effects of a 2nd-level see
invisibility spell.
You can also see powerful magic auras. The highest-level
magic aura within 30 feet of you glows in a color that reveals
its school to you and allows you to determine where the effect
originates. This can narrow down the origin point of the effect
to a 5-foot-cube, but not more precisely than that.
615
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
The robe of eyes is not without its dangers. If any spell
with the light trait is cast on you or your square while you
are wearing the robe, you are blinded for a number of rounds
equal to the spell’s level unless you succeed at a Fortitude
save against the spell’s DC.
Activate [one-action] Interact; Effect You pluck an eye
from the robe and toss it into the air,
where it turns invisible and floats to a
destination you choose, with the same
effect as a 5th-level prying eye spell.
You can Sustain the Activation just as you
would be able to Sustain the Spell.
ROBE OF THE ARCHMAGI ITEM 15+
UNCOMMON ABJURATION ARCANE INVESTED
Usage worn garment; Bulk 1
Embroidered with fine silver thread in ornate arcane patterns,
these robes come in one of three colors depending on their
attuned alignment. Good robes are white, neutral robes are
gray, and evil robes are black. An evil or good robe gains the
appropriate trait. The robes benefit only characters who can
cast arcane spells and whose alignment on the good-evil
axis matches that of the robe. If your alignment does
not match that of the robe, or you are not an arcane
spellcaster, you are instead stupefied 2 while
wearing a robe of the archmagi. This condition
can’t be removed in any way until you
remove the robe.
The robes are +2 greater resilient
explorer’s clothing, and they grant a +1
circumstance bonus to saving throws
against arcane spells and resistance 5 to
damage from arcane spells.
Activate [reaction] command; Frequency
once per day; Trigger You attempt a
saving throw against an arcane spell,
but you haven’t rolled yet; Effect You
automatically succeed at your save
against the triggering arcane spell.
Type robe of the archmagi; Level 15;
Price 6,500 gp
Type greater robe of the archmagi;
Level 19; Price 32,000 gp
The resistance against arcane spells is 10.
You can activate the robe when you or an ally
within 30 feet attempts a saving throw against
an arcane spell, and the robe grants either you
or the ally a success on the triggering saving
throw; you still can activate it only once per day.
Craft Requirements You are an arcane spellcaster.
SLIPPERS OF SPIDER CLIMBING ITEM 7
INVESTED MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 325 gp
Usage worn shoes; Bulk L
These soft slippers are made of fine gray silk. If the slippers
are left unattended for a while, they tend to attract spiders
that nest inside.
Activate [one-action] command; Frequency once per hour; Effect
Tiny, hairlike tendrils extend from the slippers’ soles, allowing
you to walk on vertical surfaces or even to move upside down
along ceilings. For 1 minute, you gain a 20-foot
climb Speed and you don’t need to use
your hands to Climb. However, the
slippers require decent traction for
you to walk on a wall, so they provide
no benefit when you’re moving across
greased, icy, or oiled surfaces.
THIRD EYE ITEM 19
DIVINATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Price 40,000 gp
Usage worn; Bulk —
When invested, this ornate crown and its incandescent
gemstone meld into your head and take the form of a tattoo.
This grants you otherworldly sight and allows you to read
auras. No one but you can manipulate the third eye while it’s
invested by you. Your heightened senses and ability to
sense emotional auras grant you a +3 item bonus to
Perception checks.
You continuously see magic auras, as a 9thlevel detect magic spell, except you see the
location of all auras within 30 feet, not
just the strongest. If you use a Seek
action to study a creature you can see,
you can perceive an aura that conveys
knowledge of that creature’s health,
including all conditions and afflictions it
has and an approximate percentage of its
remaining Hit Points.
Activate [two-actions] envision, command;
Frequency once per day; Effect You
gain the effects of an 8th-level true
seeing spell.
TRACKER’S GOGGLES ITEM 3+
DIVINATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Usage worn eyepiece; Bulk—
These lenses of forest-green glass are
bound in rough leather stitched with crude
twine. While wearing these goggles, you
gain a +1 bonus to Survival checks to Sense
Direction and Track. If you fail a check to
Track, you can try again after 30 minutes
rather than an hour.
Type tracker’s goggles; Level 3; Price
60 gp
Type greater tracker’s goggles; Level
9; Price 660 gp
The goggles grant a +2 bonus. If you fail a
check to Track, you can try again after 15 minutes
rather than an hour.
Core Rulebook
616
VENTRILOQUIST’S RING ITEM 3+
ILLUSION INVESTED MAGICAL
Usage worn; Bulk —
This elegant copper ring has miniature
images of songbirds engraved around its
circumference. You gain a +1 item bonus
to Deception checks.
Activate [two-actions] Interact; Frequency
once per day; Effect Twisting the ring
around your finger allows you to magically
throw your voice, with the effects of a
ventriloquism spell (DC 19).
Type ventriloquist’s ring; Level 3; Price 60 gp
Type greater ventriloquist’s ring; Level 9; Price 670 gp
The ring grants a +2 bonus. When you activate the ring,
you gain the effects of 2nd-level ventriloquism (DC 27).
You can activate the ring any number of times per day.
VOYAGER’S PACK ITEM 17
UNCOMMON CONJURATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Price 14,800 gp
Usage worn backpack; Bulk —
This leather rucksack has icons burned into it,
and every time it’s taken to a plane it hasn’t
been to before, a new icon representing that
plane scorches into the surface. The pack
grants you a +3 bonus to Survival checks.
It also enables you to see the magical traces
of creatures’ passage, allowing you to Track a
creature that has teleported. The GM sets the DC
of this check, usually using the level and DC of the
teleportation spell. This lets you find the location of the
creature’s destination, and you can use that destination
when casting teleport or activating the pack, even though you
don’t know what it looks like.
The pack contains an extradimensional space with the
same properties as a type II bag of holding. This space
contains the contents of a climber’s kit. If any components
of that kit are removed and not returned, they return to the
pack at dawn each day.
Activate 10 minutes (command, envision, Interact);
Effect  As you activate the pack, you can harness up to
four willing creatures to the ropes on the pack. At the end
of the activation time, the pack casts a 7th-level plane shift
or teleport spell, transporting you and everyone attached
to the pack. Attempt a DC 45 Survival check. On a success,
you arrive 25 miles off target using plane shift or halve the
distance you’re off-target with teleport. On a critical success,
you arrive exactly on target.
WAYFINDER ITEM 2
UNCOMMON EVOCATION INVESTED MAGICAL
Price 28 gp
Usage worn; Bulk —
This compact compass repurposes ancient technology to draw
fantastic powers from the mysterious magical items called
aeon stones. It serves as a badge of office for agents of the
Pathfinder Society and as a status symbol among adventurers
of any stripe. A wayfinder functions as a compass.
An indentation in the middle of the wayfinder can hold a
single aeon stone (page 604). Placing an aeon stone in this
indentation provides you all the benefits of having the aeon
stone orbiting your head, but it protects the stone from being
noticed or stolen as easily. You invest a wayfinder and the
aeon stone within it simultaneously, and they count as only
one item toward your investiture limit. An invested aeon stone
slotted in a wayfinder also grants its resonant power.
If you have more than one wayfinder with
an invested aeon stone on your person at a
given time, destructive interference from
their resonance prevents you from gaining
benefits from any of them. You can
still benefit from additional aeon stones
orbiting your head, just not in wayfinders.
Activate [one-action] command; Effect The wayfinder is
targeted by a 1st-level light spell.
WHISPER OF THE FIRST LIE ITEM 20
RARE ENCHANTMENT INVESTED MAGICAL
Price 60,000 gp
Usage worn; Bulk —
This delicate necklace contains
bottled whispers distilled from a
source on the Astral Plane rumored to
be connected to the first lie ever told.
While wearing the necklace, you gain a +3
item bonus to Deception checks, and you can
attempt to counteract effects that would force
you to tell the truth or determine whether you
are lying. Success on this counteract attempt lets
you ignore the effect, rather than removing the effect
entirely. The counteract level is 9, with a counteract
modifier of +35.
Activate [three-actions] Interact, envision, command; Effect
You unstopper the vial and release the lie, creating the
effect of a fabricated truth (DC 47). The vial is emptied and
can never be activated again.
Craft Requirements Supply a casting of fabricated truth.
WINGED BOOTS ITEM 10
INVESTED MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
Price 850 gp
Usage worn shoes; Bulk L
Made from soft leather, with delicate white wings attached
to the heel, these boots are ensorcelled with powerful air
magic. Whenever you fall while wearing these boots, the
boots automatically cast feather fall on you. This benefit can’t
trigger again for 10 minutes.
Activate [two-actions] command, Interact; Frequency once per day;
Effect You speak a command word and click the boots’ heels
together to cause the wings to animate and flap rapidly,
granting you a fly Speed of 30 feet for 10 minutes.
617
Crafting & Treasure 11
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Core Rulebook
618
Conditions are persistent. Whenever you’re affected by
a condition, its effects last until the condition’s stated
duration ends, the condition is removed, or terms dictated
in the condition itself cause it to end.
Condition Values
Some conditions have a numerical value, called a
condition value, indicated by a numeral following the
condition. This value conveys the severity of a condition,
and such conditions often give you a bonus or penalty
equal to their value. These values can often be reduced by
skills, spells, or simply waiting. If a condition value is ever
reduced to 0, the condition ends.
Overriding Conditions
Some conditions override others. This is always specified
in the entry for the overriding condition. When this
happens, all effects of the overridden condition are
suppressed until the overriding condition ends. The
overridden condition’s duration continues to elapse, and
it might run out while suppressed.
List of Conditions
Blinded
You can’t see. All normal terrain is difficult terrain to you.
You can’t detect anything using vision. You automatically
critically fail Perception checks that require you to be
able to see, and if vision is your only precise sense, you
take a –4 status penalty to Perception checks. You are
immune to visual effects. Blinded overrides dazzled.
Broken
Broken is a condition that affects objects. An object is
broken when damage has reduced its Hit Points below
its Broken Threshold. A broken object can’t be used for
its normal function, nor does it grant bonuses—with the
exception of armor. Broken armor still grants its item bonus
to AC, but it also imparts a status penalty to AC depending
on its category: –1 for broken light armor, –2 for broken
medium armor, or –3 for broken heavy armor.
A broken item still imposes penalties and limitations
normally incurred by carrying, holding, or wearing  it.
For example, broken armor would still impose its Dexterity
modifier cap, check penalty, and so forth.
If an effect makes an item broken automatically and the
item has more HP than its Broken Threshold, that effect
also reduces the item’s current HP to the Broken Threshold.
Clumsy
Your movements become clumsy and inexact. Clumsy
always includes a value. You take a status penalty equal
to the condition value to Dexterity-based checks and
DCs, including AC, Reflex saves, ranged attack rolls, and
skill checks using Acrobatics, Stealth, and Thievery.
Concealed
While you are concealed from a creature, such as in a thick
fog, you are difficult for that creature to see. You can still
be observed, but you’re tougher to target. A creature that
you’re concealed from must succeed at a DC 5 flat check
when targeting you with an attack, spell, or other effect.
Area effects aren’t subject to this flat check. If the check
fails, the attack, spell, or effect doesn’t affect you.
Confused
You don’t have your wits about you, and you attack
wildly. You are flat-footed, you don’t treat anyone as your
ally (though they might still treat you as theirs), and you
can’t Delay, Ready, or use reactions.
You use all your actions to Strike or cast offensive
cantrips, though the GM can have you use other actions
to facilitate attack, such as draw a weapon, move so that a
target is in reach, and so forth. Your targets are determined
randomly by the GM. If you have no other viable targets,
you target yourself, automatically hitting but not scoring a
critical hit. If it’s impossible for you to attack or cast spells,
you babble incoherently, wasting your actions.
Each time you take damage from an attack or spell,
you can attempt a DC 11 flat check to recover from your
confusion and end the condition.
Controlled
Someone else is making your decisions for you, usually
because you’re being commanded or magically dominated.
The controller dictates how you act and can make you
use any of your actions, including attacks, reactions, or
even Delay. The controller usually does not have to spend
their own actions when controlling you.
Conditions Appendix
While adventuring, characters (and sometimes their belongings) are affected by abilities and
effects that apply conditions. For example, a spell or magic item might turn you invisible or
cause you to be gripped by fear. Conditions change your state of being in some way, and they
represent everything from the attitude other creatures have toward you and how they interact
with you to what happens when a creature drains your blood or life essence.
APPENDIX A
619
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Dazzled
Your eyes are overstimulated. If vision is your only precise
sense, all creatures and objects are concealed from you.
Deafened
You can’t hear. You automatically critically fail Perception
checks that require you to be able to hear. You take a
–2 status penalty to Perception checks for initiative and
checks that involve sound but also rely on other senses. If
you perform an action with the auditory trait, you must
succeed at a DC 5 flat check or the action is lost; attempt
the check after spending the action but before any effects
are applied. You are immune to auditory effects.
Doomed
A powerful force has gripped your soul, calling you
closer to death. Doomed always includes a value. The
dying value at which you die is reduced by your doomed
value. If your maximum dying value is reduced to 0, you
instantly die. When you die, you’re no longer doomed.
Your doomed value decreases by 1 each time you get a
full night’s rest.
Drained
When a creature successfully drains you of blood or life
force, you become less healthy. Drained always includes
a value. You take a status penalty equal to your drained
value on Constitution-based checks, such as Fortitude
saves. You also lose a number of Hit Points equal to your
level (minimum 1) times the drained value, and your
maximum Hit Points are reduced by the same amount.
For example, if you’re hit by an effect that inflicts drained
3 and you’re a 3rd-level character, you lose 9 Hit Points
and reduce your maximum Hit Points by 9. Losing these
Hit Points doesn’t count as taking damage.
Each time you get a full night’s rest, your drained value
decreases by 1. This increases your maximum Hit Points,
but you don’t immediately recover the lost Hit Points.
Dying
You are bleeding out or otherwise at death’s door. While
you have this condition, you are unconscious. Dying always
includes a value, and if it ever reaches dying 4, you die. If
you’re dying, you must attempt a recovery check (page 459)
at the start of your turn each round to determine whether
you get better or worse. Your dying condition increases by 1
if you take damage while dying, or by 2 if you take damage
from an enemy’s critical hit or a critical failure on your save.
If you lose the dying condition by succeeding at a
recovery check and are still at 0 Hit Points, you remain
unconscious, but you can wake up as described in that
condition. You lose the dying condition automatically and
wake up if you ever have 1 Hit Point or more. Any time
you lose the dying condition, you gain the wounded 1
condition, or increase your wounded condition value by 1
if you already have that condition.
GROUPS OF CONDITIONS
Some conditions exist relative to one another or share a
similar theme. It can be useful to look at these conditions
together, rather than viewing them in isolation, to
understand how they interact.
Degrees of Detection: Observed, hidden, undetected,
unnoticed
Senses: Blinded, concealed, dazzled, deafened, invisible
Death and Dying: Doomed, dying, unconscious, wounded
Attitudes: Hostile, unfriendly, indifferent, friendly, helpful
Lowered Abilities: Clumsy, drained, enfeebled, stupefied
Encumbered
You are carrying more weight than you can manage.
While you’re encumbered, you’re clumsy 1 and take a
10-foot penalty to all your Speeds. As with all penalties
to your Speed, this can’t reduce your Speed below 5 feet.
Enfeebled
You’re physically weakened. Enfeebled always includes a
value. When you are enfeebled, you take a status penalty
equal to the condition value to Strength-based rolls
and DCs, including Strength-based melee attack rolls,
Strength-based damage rolls, and Athletics checks.
Fascinated
You are compelled to focus your attention on something,
distracting you from whatever else is going on around
you. You take a –2 status penalty to Perception and skill
checks, and you can’t use actions with the concentrate
trait unless they or their intended consequences are
related to the subject of your fascination (as determined
by the GM). For instance, you might be able to Seek
and Recall Knowledge about the subject, but you likely
couldn’t cast a spell targeting a different creature. This
DEATH AND DYING RULES
The doomed, dying, unconscious, and wounded
conditions all relate to the process of coming closer to
death. The full rules are on pages 459–461. The most
significant information not contained in the conditions
themselves is this: When you’re reduced to 0 Hit Points,
you’re knocked out with the following effects:
• You immediately move your initiative position to
directly before the creature or effect that reduced you
to 0 Hit Points.
• You gain the dying 1 condition. If the effect that
knocked you out was a critical success from the
attacker or the result of your critical failure, you
gain the dying 2 condition instead. If you have the
wounded condition, increase these values by your
wounded value. If the damage came from a nonlethal
attack or effect, you don’t gain the dying condition—
you are instead unconscious with 0 Hit Points.
Core Rulebook
620
condition ends if a creature uses hostile actions against
you or any of your allies.
Fatigued
You’re tired and can’t summon much energy. You take
a –1  status penalty to AC and saving throws. While
exploring, you can’t choose an exploration activity.
You recover from fatigue after a full night’s rest.
Flat-Footed
You’re distracted or otherwise unable to focus your full
attention on defense. You take a –2 circumstance penalty
to AC. Some effects give you the flat-footed condition only
to certain creatures or against certain attacks. Others—
especially conditions—can make you universally flatfooted against everything. If a rule doesn’t specify that the
condition applies only to certain circumstances, it applies
to all of them; for example, many effects simply say “The
target is flat-footed.”
Fleeing
You’re forced to run away due to fear or some other
compulsion. On your turn, you must spend each of your
actions trying to escape the source of the fleeing condition
as expediently as possible (such as by using move actions
to flee, or opening doors barring your escape). The source
is usually the effect or caster that gave you the condition,
though some effects might define something else as the
source. You can’t Delay or Ready while fleeing.
Friendly
This condition reflects a creature’s disposition toward
a particular character, and it affects only creatures that
are not player characters. A creature that is friendly to a
character likes that character. The character can attempt
to make a Request of a friendly creature, and the friendly
creature is likely to agree to a simple and safe request that
doesn’t cost it much to fulfill. If the character or one of
their allies uses hostile actions against the creature, the
creature gains a worse attitude condition depending on the
severity of the hostile action, as determined by the GM.
Frightened
You’re gripped by fear and struggle to control your nerves.
The frightened condition always includes a value. You take
a status penalty equal to this value to all your checks and
DCs. Unless specified otherwise, at the end of each of your
turns, the value of your frightened condition decreases
by 1.
Grabbed
You’re held in place by another creature, giving you the
flat-footed and immobilized conditions. If you attempt a
manipulate action while grabbed, you must succeed at a
DC 5 flat check or it is lost; roll the check after spending
the action, but before any effects are applied.
Helpful
This condition reflects a creature’s disposition toward
a particular character, and it affects only creatures that
are not player characters. A creature that is helpful to a
character wishes to actively aid that character. It will
accept reasonable Requests from that character, as long as
such requests aren’t at the expense of the helpful creature’s
goals or quality of life. If the character or one of their allies
uses a hostile action against the creature, the creature gains
a worse attitude condition depending on the severity of the
hostile action, as determined by the GM.
Hidden
While you’re hidden from a creature, that creature knows
the space you’re in but can’t tell precisely where you are.
You typically become hidden by using Stealth to Hide.
When Seeking a creature using only imprecise senses, it
remains hidden, rather than observed. A creature you’re
hidden from is flat-footed to you, and it must succeed at
a DC 11 flat check when targeting you with an attack,
spell, or other effect or it fails affect you. Area effects aren’t
subject to this flat check.
A creature might be able to use the Seek action to try to
observe you, as described on page 471.
Hostile
This condition reflects a creature’s disposition toward a
particular character, and it affects only creatures that are not
player characters. A creature that is hostile to a character
actively seeks to harm that character. It doesn’t necessarily
attack, but it won’t accept Requests from the character.
Immobilized
You can’t use any action with the move trait. If you’re
immobilized by something holding you in place and an
external force would move you out of your space, the
force must succeed at a check against either the DC of the
effect holding you in place or the relevant defense (usually
Fortitude DC) of the monster holding you in place.
Indifferent
This condition reflects a creature’s disposition toward a
particular character, and it affects only creatures that are
not player characters. A creature that is indifferent to a
character doesn’t really care one way or the other about
that character. Assume a creature’s attitude to a given
character is indifferent unless specified otherwise.
Invisible
While invisible, you can’t be seen. You’re undetected to
everyone. Creatures can Seek to attempt to detect you; if
a creature succeeds at its Perception check against your
Stealth DC, you become hidden to that creature until
you Sneak to become undetected again. If you become
invisible while someone can already see you, you start
out hidden to the observer (instead of undetected) until
APPENDIX A
621
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
you successfully Sneak. You can’t become observed while
invisible except via special abilities or magic.
Observed
Anything in plain view is observed by you. If a creature
takes measures to avoid detection, such as by using Stealth
to Hide, it can become hidden or undetected instead of
observed. If you have another precise sense instead of or in
addition to sight, you might be able to observe a creature or
object using that sense instead. You can observe a creature
only with precise senses. When Seeking a creature using only
imprecise senses, it remains hidden, rather than observed.
Paralyzed
Your body is frozen in place. You have the flat-footed
condition and can’t act except to Recall Knowledge and
use actions that require only the use of your mind (as
determined by the GM). Your senses still function, but
only in the areas you can perceive without moving your
body, so you can’t Seek while paralyzed.
Persistent Damage
Persistent damage comes from effects like acid, being on
fire, or many other situations. It appears as “X persistent
[type] damage,” where “X” is the amount of damage dealt
and “[type]” is the damage type. Instead of taking persistent
damage immediately, you take it at the end of each of your
turns as long as you have the condition, rolling any damage
dice anew each time. After you take persistent damage, roll
a DC 15 flat check to see if you recover from the persistent
damage. If you succeed, the condition ends.
Petrified
You have been turned to stone. You can’t act, nor can
you sense anything. You become an object with a Bulk
double your normal Bulk (typically 12 for a petrified
Medium creature or 6 for a petrified Small creature), AC 9,
Hardness 8, and the same current Hit Points you had when
alive. You don’t have a Broken Threshold. When you’re
turned back into flesh, you have the same number of Hit
Points you had as a statue. If the statue is destroyed, you
immediately die. While petrified, your mind and body are
in stasis, so you don’t age or notice the passing of time.
Prone
You’re lying on the ground. You are flat-footed and take
a –2 circumstance penalty to attack rolls. The only move
actions you can use while you’re prone are Crawl and
Stand. Standing up ends the prone condition. You can
Take Cover while prone to hunker down and gain cover
against ranged attacks, even if you don’t have an object to
get behind, gaining a +4 circumstance bonus to AC against
ranged attacks (but you remain flat-footed).
If you would be knocked prone while you’re Climbing
or Flying, you fall (see pages 463–464 for the rules on
falling). You can’t be knocked prone when Swimming.
PERSISTENT DAMAGE RULES
The additional rules presented below apply to persistent
damage in certain cases.
Assisted Recovery
You can take steps to help yourself recover from
persistent damage, or an ally can help you, allowing you
to attempt an additional flat check before the end of your
turn. This is usually an activity requiring 2 actions, and
it must be something that would reasonably improve
your chances (as determined by the GM). For example,
you might try to smother a flame, wash off acid, or use
Medicine to Administer First Aid to stanch bleeding. This
allows you to attempt an extra flat check immediately.
The GM decides how your help works, using the
following examples as guidelines.
• Reduce the DC of the flat check to 10 for a particularly
appropriate type of help, such as dousing you in water to
put out flames.
• Automatically end the condition due to the type of help,
such as healing that restores you to your maximum HP
to end persistent bleed damage, or submerging yourself
in a lake to end persistent fire damage.
• Alter the number of actions required to help you if
the means the helper uses are especially efficient or
remarkably inefficient.
Persistent damage runs its course and automatically
ends after a certain amount of time as fire burns out,
blood clots, and the like. The GM determines when this
occurs, but it usually takes 1 minute.
Immunities, Resistances, and Weaknesses
Immunities, resistances, and weaknesses all apply to
persistent damage. If an effect deals initial damage
in addition to persistent damage, apply immunities,
resistances, and weaknesses separately to the initial
damage and to the persistent damage. Usually, if an
effect negates the initial damage, it also negates the
persistent damage, such as with a slashing weapon that
also deals persistent bleed damage because it cut you.
The GM might rule otherwise in some situations.
Multiple Persistent Damage Conditions
You can be simultaneously affected by multiple persistent
damage conditions so long as they have different damage
types. If you would gain more than one persistent damage
condition with the same damage type, the higher amount
of damage overrides the lower amount. The damage you
take from persistent damage occurs all at once, so if
something triggers when you take damage, it triggers
only once; for example, if you’re dying with several types
of persistent damage, the persistent damage increases
your dying condition only once.
Core Rulebook
622
Quickened
You gain 1 additional action at the start of your turn each
round. Many effects that make you quickened specify the
types of actions you can use with this additional action.
If you become quickened from multiple sources, you can
use the extra action you’ve been granted for any single
action allowed by any of the effects that made you
quickened. Because quickened has its effect at the start
of your turn, you don’t immediately gain actions if you
become quickened during your turn.
Restrained
You’re tied up and can barely move, or a creature has
you pinned. You have the flat-footed and immobilized
conditions, and you can’t use any actions with the attack
or manipulate traits except to attempt to Escape or Force
Open your bonds. Restrained overrides grabbed.
Sickened
You feel ill. Sickened always includes a value. You take
a status penalty equal to this value on all your checks
and DCs. You can’t willingly ingest anything—including
elixirs and potions—while sickened.
You can spend a single action retching in an attempt to
recover, which lets you immediately attempt a Fortitude
save against the DC of the effect that made you sickened.
On a success, you reduce your sickened value by 1 (or by
2 on a critical success).
Slowed
You have fewer actions. Slowed always includes a value.
When you regain your actions at the start of your turn,
reduce the number of actions you regain by your slowed
value. Because slowed has its effect at the start of your
turn, you don’t immediately lose actions if you become
slowed during your turn.
Stunned
You’ve become senseless. You can’t act while stunned.
Stunned usually includes a value, which indicates how
many total actions you lose, possibly over multiple turns,
from being stunned. Each time you regain actions (such
as at the start of your turn), reduce the number you regain
by your stunned value, then reduce your stunned value
by the number of actions you lost. For example, if you
were stunned 4, you would lose all 3 of your actions on
your turn, reducing you to stunned 1; on your next turn,
you would lose 1 more action, and then be able to use
your remaining 2 actions normally. Stunned might also
have a duration instead of a value, such as “stunned for
1 minute.” In this case, you lose all your actions for the
listed duration.
Stunned overrides slowed. If the duration of your
stunned condition ends while you are slowed, you count
the actions lost to the stunned condition toward those lost
to being slowed. So, if you were stunned 1 and slowed 2
at the beginning of your turn, you would lose 1 action
from stunned, and then lose only 1 additional action by
being slowed, so you would still have 1 action remaining
to use that turn.
Stupefied
Your thoughts and instincts are clouded. Stupefied always
includes a value. You take a status penalty equal to this
value on Intelligence-, Wisdom-, and Charisma-based
checks and DCs, including Will saving throws, spell
attack rolls, spell DCs, and skill checks that use these
ability scores. Any time you attempt to Cast a Spell while
stupefied, the spell is disrupted unless you succeed at a
flat check with a DC equal to 5 + your stupefied value.
Unconscious
You’re sleeping, or you’ve been knocked out. You can’t
act. You take a –4 status penalty to AC, Perception, and
Reflex saves, and you have the blinded and flat-footed
conditions. When you gain this condition, you fall prone
and drop items you are wielding or holding unless the
effect states otherwise or the GM determines you’re in a
position in which you wouldn’t.
If you’re unconscious because you’re dying, you can’t
wake up while you have 0 Hit Points. If you are restored
to 1 Hit Point or more via healing, you lose the dying and
unconscious conditions and can act normally on your
next turn.
If you are unconscious and at 0 Hit Points, but not
dying, you naturally return to 1 Hit Point and awaken
after sufficient time passes. The GM determines how long
you remain unconscious, from a minimum of 10 minutes
GAINING AND LOSING ACTIONS
Quickened, slowed, and stunned are the primary ways
you can gain or lose actions on a turn. The rules for
how this works appear on page 462. In brief, these
conditions alter how many actions you regain at the
start of your turn; thus, gaining the condition in the
middle of your turn doesn’t adjust your number of
actions on that turn. If you have conflicting conditions
that affect your number of actions, you choose which
actions you lose. For instance, the action gained from
haste lets you only Stride or Strike, so if you need to
lose one action because you’re also slowed, you might
decide to lose the action from haste, letting you keep
your other actions that can be used more flexibly.
Some conditions prevent you from taking a certain
subset of actions, typically reactions. Other conditions
simply say you can’t act. When you can’t act, you’re
unable to take any actions at all. Unlike slowed or
stunned, these don’t change the number of actions you
regain; they just prevent you from using them. That
means if you are somehow cured of paralysis on your
turn, you can act immediately.
APPENDIX A
623
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
to several hours. If you receive healing during this time,
you lose the unconscious condition and can act normally
on your next turn.
If you’re unconscious and have more than 1 Hit Point
(typically because you are asleep or unconscious due to
an effect), you wake up in one of the following ways.
Each causes you to lose the unconscious condition.
• You take damage, provided the damage doesn’t
reduce you to 0 Hit Points. If the damage reduces
you to 0 Hit Points, you remain unconscious and
gain the dying condition as normal.
• You receive healing, other than the natural healing
you get from resting.
• Someone shakes you awake with an Interact action.
• There’s loud noise going on around you—though
this isn’t automatic. At the start of your turn, you
automatically attempt a Perception check against
the noise’s DC (or the lowest DC if there is more
than one noise), waking up if you succeed. If
creatures are attempting to stay quiet around you,
this Perception check uses their Stealth DCs. Some
magical effects make you sleep so deeply that they
don’t allow you to attempt this Perception check.
• If you are simply asleep, the GM decides you wake
up either because you have had a restful night’s
sleep or something disrupted that rest.
Undetected
When you are undetected by a creature, that creature
cannot see you at all, has no idea what space you occupy,
and can’t target you, though you still can be affected by
abilities that target an area. When you’re undetected by a
creature, that creature is flat-footed to you.
A creature you’re undetected by can guess which square
you’re in to try targeting you. It must pick a square and
attempt an attack. This works like targeting a hidden
creature (requiring a DC 11 flat check, as described on
page 466), but the flat check and attack roll are rolled in
secret by the GM, who doesn’t reveal whether the attack
missed due to failing the flat check, failing the attack roll,
or choosing the wrong square.
A creature can use the Seek action to try to find you, as
described on page 471.
Unfriendly
This condition reflects a creature’s disposition toward
a particular character, and it affects only creatures that
are not player characters. A creature that is unfriendly
to a character dislikes and specifically distrusts that
character. The unfriendly creature won’t accept Requests
from the character.
Unnoticed
If you are unnoticed by a creature, that creature has no
idea you are present at all. When you’re unnoticed, you’re
also undetected by the creature. This condition matters
for abilities that can be used only against targets totally
unaware of your presence.
Wounded
You have been seriously injured. If you lose the dying
condition and do not already have the wounded
condition, you become wounded 1. If you already
have the wounded condition when you lose the dying
condition, your wounded condition value increases by 1.
If you gain the dying condition while wounded, increase
your dying condition value by your wounded value.
The wounded condition ends if someone successfully
restores Hit Points to you with Treat Wounds, or if you
are restored to full Hit Points and rest for 10 minutes.
REDUNDANT CONDITIONS
You can have a given condition only once at a time. If
an effect would impose a condition you already have,
you now have that condition for the longer of the two
durations. The shorter-duration condition effectively
ends, though other conditions caused by the original,
shorter-duration effect might continue.
For example, let’s say you have been hit by a monster
that drains your vitality; your wound causes you to be
enfeebled 2 and flat-footed until the end of the monster’s
next turn. Before the end of that creature’s next turn, a
trap poisons you, making you enfeebled 2 for 1 minute. In
this case, the enfeebled 2 that lasts for 1 minute replaces
the enfeebled 2 from the monster, so you would be
enfeebled 2 for the longer duration. You would remain
flat-footed, since nothing replaced that condition, and it
still lasts only until the end of the monster’s next turn.
Any ability that removes a condition removes it
entirely, no matter what its condition value is or how
many times you’ve been affected by it. In the example
above, a spell that removes the enfeebled condition from
you would remove it entirely—the spell wouldn’t need to
remove it twice.
Redundant Conditions with Values
Conditions with different values are considered different
conditions. If you’re affected by a condition with a
value multiple times, you apply only the highest value,
although you might have to track both durations if one
has a lower value but lasts longer. For example, if you
had a slowed 2 condition that lasts 1 round and a slowed
1 condition that lasts for 6 rounds, you’d be slowed 2 for
the first round, and then you’d change to slowed 1 for
the remaining 5 rounds of the second effect’s duration. If
something reduces the condition value, it reduces it for
all conditions of that name affecting you. For instance, in
this example above, if something reduced your slowed
value by 1, it would reduce the first condition from the
example to slowed 1 and reduce the second to slowed 0,
removing it.
Hit Points
Perception
Skills
Armor Class
Saving Throws
DECEPTION
PERFORMANCE
ATHLETICS
NATURE
INTIMIDATION
SOCIETY
SURVIVAL
ARCANA
ACROBATICS
MEDICINE
DIPLOMACY
RELIGION
CRAFTING
OCCULTISM
LORE
STEALTH
THIEVERY
LORE
RESISTANCES AND IMMUNITIES
CONDITIONS
PROF ITEM T E M L
MAX HP BT CURRENT HP
REFLEX
ITEM
DEX PROF
WILL
ITEM
WIS PROF
T E M L T E M L T E M L
T E M L
FORTITUDE
ITEM
CON PROF
WIS PROF ITEM
DYING WOUNDED
CURRENT TEMPORARY
Languages
Class DC
DEX CAP
OR 10
DC BASE
=
T E M L KEY PROF ITEM
Weapon Proficiencies
T E M L SIMPLE T E M L OTHER T E M L OTHER T E M L MARTIAL
10
DC BASE
=
STR
MODIFIER
STRENGTH SCORE
DEX
MODIFIER
DEXTERITY SCORE
CON
MODIFIER
CONSTITUTION SCORE
INT
MODIFIER
INTELLIGENCE SCORE
WIS
MODIFIER
WISDOM SCORE
CHA
MODIFIER
CHARISMA SCORE
Melee Strikes Weapon
P
S
B
STR PROF
= T E M L ITEM
Damage
DICE STR W SPEC OTHER TRAITS
Weapon
P
S
B
STR PROF
= T E M L ITEM
Damage
DICE STR W SPEC OTHER TRAITS
Weapon
P
S
B
STR PROF
= T E M L ITEM
Damage
DICE STR W SPEC OTHER TRAITS
Weapon
P
S
B
DEX PROF
= T E M L ITEM
Damage
DICE SPECIAL W SPEC OTHER TRAITS
Weapon
P
S
B
DEX PROF
= T E M L ITEM
Damage
DICE SPECIAL W SPEC OTHER TRAITS
Weapon
P
S
B
DEX PROF
= T E M L ITEM
Damage
DICE SPECIAL W SPEC OTHER TRAITS
Ranged Strikes
SENSES
NOTES
speed feet
MOVEMENT TYPES & NOTES
UNARMORED
T E M L
MEDIUM
T E M L
LIGHT
T E M L
HEAVY
T E M L
= T E M L INT PROF ITEM
= T E M L STR PROF ITEM
= T E M L INT PROF ITEM
= T E M L CHA PROF ITEM
= T E M L CHA PROF ITEM
= T E M L CHA PROF ITEM
= T E M L INT PROF ITEM
= T E M L INT PROF ITEM
= T E M L WIS PROF ITEM
= T E M L WIS PROF ITEM
= T E M L INT PROF ITEM
= T E M L CHA PROF ITEM
= T E M L WIS PROF ITEM
= T E M L INT PROF ITEM
= T E M L WIS PROF ITEM
= T E M L DEX PROF ITEM
= T E M L DEX PROF ITEM
= T E M L DEX PROF ITEM
Ability Scores
HARDNESS
Permission granted to photocopy for personal use only.
Character
Sheet
PROFICIENCY
Untrained +0
Trained 2+Level
Expert 4+Level
Master 6+Level
Legendary 8+Level
[one-action] Single Action
[two-actions] Two-Action Activity
[three-actions] Three-Action Activity
[free-action] Free Action
[reaction] Reaction
Player
Name
Experience
Points (XP)
Character
Name
Shield
Ancestry and Heritage
Background
Class
Size Alignment Traits
Deity
Level
Hero Points
+
= MAX
AC
ARMOR
-
ARMOR
-
ARMOR
-
ARMOR
-

SPECIAL 1st FEATURE 1st
FEAT 6th
FEATURE 13th
BACKGROUND
FEAT 1st FEAT 1st
FEAT 8th
FEATURE 15th
4th
FEAT 9th FEATURE 3rd
FEAT 10th
FEATURE 17th
8th
16th
11th
HERITAGE 1st FEATURE 1st
FEATURE 7th
FEAT 14th
2nd
FEAT 2nd
FEATURE 9th
FEAT 16th
6th
14th
7th
FEAT 13th FEAT 4th
FEATURE 11th
FEAT 18th
10th
18th
15th
FEAT 17th FEATURE 5th
FEAT 5th
FEAT 12th
FEATURE 19th
FEAT 20th
12th
3rd
20th
19th
READIED ITEMS BULK OTHER ITEMS BULK
Ancestry Feats and Abilities Class Feats and Abilities
Skill Feats
General Feats
Bonus Feats
Inventory
WORN ITEMS
ENCUMBERED
= 5 MAXIMUM
STR
STR
=
BASE
BASE
10
INVEST BULK
(MAX 10)
Permission granted to photocopy for personal use only.
CP SP GP PP
BULK

CATCHPHRASES
ATTITUDE
BELIEFS
LIKES DISLIKES
APPEARANCE
ETHNICITY NATIONALITY BIRTHPLACE AGE GENDER & PRONOUNS HT WT
NOTES ALLIES
ENEMIES
ORGANIZATIONS
Character Sketch
Personality
Actions and Activities
Free Actions and Reactions
campaign Notes
NAME TRAITS PAGE
DESCRIPTION
ACTIONS NAME TRAITS PAGE
DESCRIPTION
ACTIONS
NAME TRAITS PAGE
DESCRIPTION
ACTIONS NAME TRAITS PAGE
DESCRIPTION
ACTIONS
NAME TRAITS PAGE
DESCRIPTION
ACTIONS NAME TRAITS PAGE
DESCRIPTION
ACTIONS
NAME TRAITS PAGE
TRIGGER
DESCRIPTION
FREE ACTION
REACTION
NAME TRAITS PAGE
TRIGGER
DESCRIPTION
FREE ACTION
REACTION
NAME TRAITS PAGE
TRIGGER
DESCRIPTION
FREE ACTION
REACTION
NAME TRAITS PAGE
TRIGGER
DESCRIPTION
FREE ACTION
REACTION
Permission granted to photocopy for personal use only.

CANTRIP
LEVEL 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Cantrips
Innate Spells
Focus Spells
FOCUS POINTS
Spell Attack Roll
Magic Traditions
Spell Slots Per Day
Spells
SPONTANEOUS SPELL SLOTS REMAINING
KEY PROF T E M L
10
DC BASE
=
KEY PROF T E M L
=
Permission granted to photocopy for personal use only.
CURRENT MAXIMUM
ARCANE OCCULT
PRIMAL DIVINE
PREPARED SPONTANEOUS
Spell DC
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
M S V
ACTIONS
M S V
ACTIONS
M S V
ACTIONS
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
PREP
M S V
ACTIONS
FREQ
M S V
ACTIONS
FREQ
M S V
ACTIONS

Core Rulebook
628
aberration (trait) Aberrations are creatures from beyond the planes or corruptions
of the natural order.
ability This is a general term referring to rules that provide an exception to the basic
rules. An ability could come from a number of sources, so “an ability that gives you
a bonus to damage rolls” could be a feat, a spell, and so on.
ability boost An ability boost allows you to increase one of your ability scores by 2,
or by 1 if the ability score was already 18 or higher. When you get more than one
ability boost at once, you must apply each to a different score. 20
ability flaw An ability flaw decreases one of your ability scores by 2. 20, 26
ability modifier A value added to calculations based on your ability score. 20
ability score Each creature has six ability scores: Strength, Dexterity, Constitution,
Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma. These scores represent a creature’s raw
potential and basic attributes. 12, 19–20, 24, 26
key ability (class) 67
key ability (skill) 233
retraining 481, 502
rolling ability scores (alternative rule) 20
abjuration (trait) Effects and magic items with this trait are associated with the
abjuration school of magic, typically involving protection or wards. 297
AC (Armor Class) See also Armor Class. 12, 29, 274, 447
acid (damage type) 452
acid (trait) Effects with this trait deal acid damage. Creatures with this trait have a
magical connection to acid.
Acrobatics (skill) Perform tasks requiring coordination and grace. (Dex) 240–241
actions Discrete tasks that generate a specific effect, possibly requiring a check to
determine the result. Actions can be used to accomplish a variety of things, such
as moving, attacking, casting a spell, or interacting with an item or object. Most
creatures can use up to 3 actions during their turn. 17, 461–463
hostile actions 305
single action ([one-action]) See also single action. 471
Activate an Item (activity) You provide specified components to activate an alchemical
or magical item. The number of actions this takes varies by item. 532–533
activity A category of action that typically takes more than a single action. Activities
on your turn take 2 actions ([two-actions]) or 3 actions ([three-actions]). Exploration and downtime
activities can take minutes, hours, or days. 17, 461–462
exploration activities 479–480
in encounters 472
adamantine (material) 578
additive (trait) 75
Administer First Aid [two-actions](skill action) Stabilize a dying creature or stanch bleeding.
(Medicine) 248
advancement speed 509
adventure A single narrative—including the setup, plot, and conclusion. The player
characters play through an adventure over the course of one or more game
sessions, and the adventure might be part of a larger campaign.
using adventures (GM) 486–489
aerial combat 478
Affix a Talisman (activity) Activity used to attach a talisman to an item. 565
affliction An affliction can affect a creature for a long time, over several different
stages. The most common kinds are curses, diseases, and poisons. 457–458
age 29
agile (weapon trait) 282
Aid [reaction](basic action) Grant a bonus to an ally’s skill check or attack roll. 470
air (trait) Effects with the air trait either manipulate or conjure air. Those that
manipulate air have no effect in a vacuum or an area without air. Creatures with
this trait consist primarily of air or have a magical connection to that element.
alchemical (trait) Alchemical items are powered by reactions of alchemical reagents.
Alchemical items aren’t magical and don’t radiate a magical aura. 543–554
alchemist (class) 70–81
alchemical items 543–554
multiclass archetype 220
Glossary and Index
This appendix contains page references for essential rules of the game, full definitions for
most traits, and partial definitions and calculations for many other rules.
alchemist (trait)  This indicates abilities from the alchemist class.
alignment Alignment represents a creature’s basic moral and ethical attitude on a
law-to-chaos axis and a good-to-evil axis. 12, 28–29
alignment (damage type) An umbrella category of damage including chaotic, evil,
good, and lawful damage. 452
ally An ally is someone on your side. You are not counted as your own ally. 456
ammunition 280, 559–561
anathema When a character violates restrictions on their behavior imposed by
the source of their power, they can lose related abilities. 86–87, 106, 118, 130
ancestry A broad family of people that a creature belongs to. Each player character
chooses an ancestry as the first step of character creation. 12, 22, 24–25, 32–59
angel (trait) This family of celestials is native to the plane of Nirvana. Most angels
are neutral good, have darkvision, and have a weakness to evil damage.
animal (trait) An animal is a creature with a relatively low intelligence. It typically
doesn’t have an Intelligence ability modifier over –4, can’t speak languages, and
can’t be trained in Intelligence-based skills.
animal companion 214–217
apex (trait) When you Invest an Item that has the apex trait, it improves one of
your ability scores, either increasing it by 2 or to a total of 18, whichever grants
the higher score. This gives you all the benefits of the new ability score until
the investiture ends. An apex item grants this benefit only the first time it’s
invested within a 24-hour period, and you can benefit from only one apex item
at a time. If you attempt to invest an apex item when you already have one
invested, you don’t gain the ability score increase, though you do gain any other
effects of Investing the Item. 603–604
aquatic combat 478
Arcana (skill) Know things about arcane magic and creatures. (Int) 241
arcane (trait) This magic comes from the arcane tradition, which is built on logic
and rationality. Anything with this trait is magical. 299
arcane spell list 307–309
archetype A special additional theme for your character that you can choose using
your class feats. 219–231
archetype (trait) This feat belongs to an archetype. 219
archon (trait) Members of this family of celestials are the protectors of Heaven and
are lawful good. They have darkvision and a weakness to evil damage.
area A specified shape and size of an effect. 304, 456–457
armor 274–276
magical and special armor 555–558
runes 580–583
Armor Class (AC) This score represents how hard it is to hit and damage a creature.
It typically serves as the DC to hit a creature with an attack. AC = 10 + Dex
modifier (up to your armor’s Dex Cap) + proficiency bonus + armor’s item bonus
to AC + other bonuses + penalties. 12, 29, 274, 447
Arrest a Fall [reaction] (specialty basic action) Use Acrobatics to slow your fall while
flying. 472
astral (trait) Astral creatures are native of the Astral Plane. They can survive the
basic environmental effects of the Astral Plane.
Athletics (skill) Perform deeds of physical prowess. (Str) 241–243
attached (weapon trait) 282
attack When a creature tries to harm another creature, it makes a Strike or uses
another attack action. Most attacks require an attack roll and target Armor
Class. Melee attack roll modifier = Str modifier (or optionally Dex modifier for a
finesse weapon) + proficiency bonus + other bonuses + penalties; Ranged attack
roll modifier = Dex modifier + proficiency bonus + other bonuses + penalties.
27, 278, 446–447
Aid (reaction used to grant a bonus to an ally’s attack roll) 470
critical hits 445–446, 451, 471
multiple attack penalty (–5 on your second attack, –10 on further attacks) 446
nonlethal attack 453
spell attack roll 305, 447–448
Glossary and Index A
629
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Strike (action) 471
unarmed attack 278
attack (trait) An ability with this trait involves an attack. For each attack you make
beyond the first on your turn, you take a multiple attack penalty. 12, 446–447
Attack of Opportunity [reaction] A reaction fighters and some other characters gain. 142, 473
auditory (trait) Auditory actions and effects rely on sound. An action with the
auditory trait can be successfully performed only if the creature using the action
can speak or otherwise produce the required sounds. A spell or effect with the
auditory trait has its effect only if the target can hear it. This applies only to
sound-based parts of the effect, as determined by the GM. This is different from a
sonic effect, which still affects targets who can’t hear it (such as deaf targets) as
long as the effect itself makes sound.
aura An aura is an emanation that continually ebbs out from you, affecting creatures
within a certain radius. Aura can also refer to the magical signature of an item or a
creature with a strong alignment.
Avert Gaze [one-action](specialty basic action) Get a +2 bonus against visual abilities. 472
Avoid Notice (exploration activity) Use Stealth to move without being detected. 479
azata (trait) This family of celestials is native to Elysium. They are typically chaotic
good and have darkvision and a weakness to evil and cold iron.
background The experiences your character had before becoming an adventurer. Each
player character chooses a background during character creation. 12, 25, 60–64
backstabber (weapon trait) 282
backswing (weapon trait) 282
Balance [one-action](skill action) Move on a narrow or unstable surface. (Acrobatics) 240
barbarian (class) 82–93
multiclass archetype 221
barbarian (trait)  This indicates abilities from the barbarian class.
bard (class) 94–103
composition spells 97, 386–387
multiclass archetype 222
occult spell list 311–314
bard (trait)  This indicates abilities from the bard class.
basic action An action all creatures can use. 469–472
beast (trait) A creature similar to an animal but with an Intelligence modifier of –3 or
higher is usually a beast. Unlike an animal, a beast might be able to speak and reason.
bleed (damage type) A type of persistent damage. 452
blinded (condition) You’re unable to see. 618
bludgeoning (damage type) A type of physical damage. 452
bomb (trait) An alchemical bomb combines volatile alchemical components that
explode when the bomb hits a creature or object. Most alchemical bombs deal
damage, though some produce other effects. 544–546
bonus A positive value added to a calculation. Add only the highest bonus of a single
type (circumstance, item, status). 12, 444–445
Borrow an Arcane Spell (skill action) Temporarily gain access to an arcane spell.
(Arcana, trained) 241
bright light You can see normally in bright light. 464
broken (condition) This item can’t be used for its normal function until repaired. 618
Broken Threshold (BT) When an object’s HP reaches this number, it becomes
broken. 272–273
Bulk A value indicating an item’s size, weight, and general awkwardness. It takes
10 items of light Bulk to equal 1 Bulk, and 1,000 coins are 1 Bulk. A character
becomes encumbered if they carry Bulk greater than 5 + their Str modifier, and
they can’t carry more than 10 + their Str modifier. 29, 271–272
conversion to different sizes 295
creature (Tiny 1, Small 3, Medium 6, Large 12, Huge 24, Gargantuan 48) 272
bulwark (armor trait) 274
Burrow [one-action](specialty basic action) Move up to your burrow Speed. 472
burrow Speed 463
burst (area) 456–457
campaign A serialized story focusing on a single party of characters and taking place
over multiple adventures. 9, 483–486
cantrip (trait) A spell you can cast at will that is automatically heightened to half your
level rounded up. 300
Cast a Spell (activity) You provide magical components to cast a magical spell. The
number of actions this takes varies by spell. 302–303
celestial (trait) Creatures that hail from or have a strong connection to the good-aligned
planes are called celestials. Celestials can survive the basic environmental effects
of planes in the Outer Sphere.
champion (class) 104–115
deities 437–440
devotion spells 108, 387–388
multiclass archetype 223
champion (trait)  This indicates abilities from the champion class.
chaotic (damage type) 452
chaotic (trait) Chaotic effects often manipulate energy from chaos-aligned Outer
Planes and are anathema to lawful divine servants or divine servants of lawful
deities. A creature with this trait is chaotic in alignment. An ability with this trait
can be selected or used only by chaotic creatures.
character This term is synonymous with creature, but is more often used to refer to
player characters and nonplayer characters than monsters. 8–9, 19–30
character creation 19–30
character sheet Formatted pages on which you can record your character choices,
statistics, feats, spells, and details. 24–25, 624–627
Charisma (Cha) This ability score measures your charm and force of personality. 19
Check When you roll a d20 and add modifiers, bonuses, and penalties, then compare
your result to a Difficulty Class, you’re attempting a check. 10, 443–450
check penalty (penalty to skill checks imposed by armor) 274
degrees of success (critical success, success, failure, critical failure) 445–446
flat check 450
recovery check (while dying) 459
secret check 234, 450
circumstance bonus A bonus that comes from a situation. 444–445
circumstance penalty A penalty that comes from a situation. 445
class The adventuring profession chosen by a character. Each player character picks
a class during character creation. 12, 22–23, 25–26, 66–213
class DC A class DC sets the difficulty for some abilities granted by your character’s
class. Class DC = 10 + proficiency bonus + key ability modifier. 29
class feature Any ability granted by a class is a class feature. These mainly consist of
class feats and other abilities specific to the class. 68
cleric (class) 116–127
deities and domains 118, 437–441
divine spell list 309–311
domain spells 389–399
multiclass archetype 224
cleric (trait)  This indicates abilities from the cleric class.
climate 517–518
Climb [one-action](skill action) Move along an incline or vertical surface. (Athletics) 241–242
climb Speed 463
clumsy (condition) You can’t move as easily or gracefully as usual. 618
Coerce (skill action) Make someone do what you want. (Intimidation) 247
coins 271
cold (damage type) 452
cold (trait) Effects with this trait deal cold damage. Creatures with this trait have a
connection to magical cold.
cold iron (material) 578
combatSee also encounter. 468–478
comfort (armor trait) 275
command (item activation component) 533
Command an Animal [one-action](skill action) Get an animal to obey you. (Nature) 249
common (trait) Anything that doesn’t list another rarity trait (uncommon, rare, or
unique) automatically has the common trait. This rarity indicates that an ability,
item, or spell is available to all players who meet the prerequisites for it. 13
companion (trait) An item with this trait can be worn by an animal companion or
similar creature. A companion can have up to two items invested. 604
complex (trait) A hazard with this trait takes turns in an encounter. 520–521, 526–529
component A process used to Cast a Spell or Activate an Item. 303, 532–533
composition (trait) To cast a composition cantrip or focus spell, you usually use a
type of Performance. If the spell includes a verbal component, you must use an
auditory performance, and if it includes a somatic component, you must use a
visual one. The spell gains all the traits of the performance you used. You can
cast only one composition spell each turn, and you can have only one active at a
time. If you cast a new composition spell, any ongoing effects from your previous
composition spell end immediately. 97, 99, 386–387
Conceal an Object [one-action](skill action) Hide an object on your person. (Stealth) 251
concealed (condition) Low visibility makes you difficult to target. 467, 618
Core Rulebook
630
concentrate (trait) An action with this trait requires a degree of mental concentration
and discipline.
condition An ongoing effect that changes how a character can act or alters some of
their statistics. 12, 453, 454, 618–623
cone (area) 457
confused (condition) You attack indiscriminately. 618
conjuration (trait) Effects and magic items with this trait are associated with
the conjuration school of magic, typically involving summoning, creation,
teleportation, or moving things from place to place. 297
consecration (trait) A consecration spell enhances an area for an extended period of
time. A given area can have only a single consecration effect at a time. The new
effect attempts to counteract any existing one in areas of overlap.
Constitution (Con) This ability score measures your toughness and durability. 19
construct (trait) A construct is an artificial creature empowered by a force other
than necromancy. Constructs are often mindless; they are immune to disease,
the paralyzed condition, and poison; and they may have Hardness based on the
materials used to construct their bodies. Constructs are not living creatures, nor
are they undead. When reduced to 0 Hit Points, a construct creature is destroyed.
consumable (trait) An item with this trait can be used only once. Unless stated
otherwise, it’s destroyed after activation. Consumable items include alchemical
items and magical consumables such as scrolls and talismans. When a character
creates consumable items, they can make them in batches of four. 559–571
alchemical items 543–554
crafting consumables 245
contact (trait) This poison is delivered by contact with the skin. 550
controlled (condition) Another creature determines your actions. 618
copper piece (cp) 271
cost of living 294, 502
counteract The process used when one effect tries to negate another. 305, 458–459
Counterspell [reaction] A reaction some spellcasters can use to negate spells. 198, 209
cover When you’re behind a physical obstacle, you get a +2 circumstance bonus to AC,
Reflex saves vs. area effects, and Stealth checks. This increases to +4 for greater
cover. Creatures can provide lesser cover: a +1 circumstance bonus to AC. 477
Cover Tracks (skill action) Conceal your trail during exploration. (Survival, trained) 252
cp (copper piece) 271
Craft (skill action) Make an item during downtime. (Crafting, trained) 244–245
Craft requirements for items 535
GM advice 504
Crafting (skill) Create, understand, and repair items. (Int) 243–245
Crawl [one-action](basic action) Move 5 feet while prone. 470
Create a Diversion [one-action](skill action) Distract someone. (Deception) 245
Create Forgery (skill action) Make a false document in downtime. (Society, trained) 251
creature An active participant in the story and world. This includes monsters and
nonplayer characters (played by the Game Master) and player characters (played
by the other players).
monster identification 238–239, 506
critical You can get a greater success—a critical success—by rolling 10 above your DC,
or a worse failure—a critical failure—by rolling 10 lower than your DC. 445–446
critical hit (Strike) 471
critical specialization (weapons) 283–284
currency 12, 271
curse (trait) A curse is an effect that places some long-term affliction on a creature.
Curses are always magical and are typically the result of a spell or trap. 457–458
d4, d6, d8, d10, d12, d20, and d% Notations for different sizes of dice. “d20” is a
twenty-sided die, for example. 7
daily preparations During your morning preparations, you ready your gear, prepare
spells, and otherwise get ready for your adventuring day. 480, 500
damage Damage dealt to a creature reduces that creature’s Hit Points on a 1-to-1 basis.
Melee damage roll = damage die of the weapon or unarmed attack + Str modifier
+ bonuses + penalties; Ranged damage roll = damage die of the weapon + Str
modifier for a thrown weapon + bonuses + penalties. 450–453
damage dice 279, 450–451
damage types 451, 452
damage while dying 459
doubling and halving 451
environmental damage (GM) 512
massive damage (You die if one blow deals double your maximum HP.) 461
nonlethal attack 453
persistent damage (condition) 621
darkness Creatures and objects in darkness are hidden or undetected, and creatures
without darkvision have the blinded condition in darkness. 464
darkness (trait) Darkness effects extinguish non-magical light in the area, and can
counteract (page 458–459) less powerful magical light. You must usually target
light magic with your darkness magic directly to counteract the light, but some
darkness spells automatically attempt to counteract light. 464
darkvision (sense) See clearly in darkness, though in black and white only. 465
darkwood (material) 578–579
dazzled (condition) Everything is concealed to you. 619
DC (Difficulty Class)See also Difficulty Class. 445, 503–506
deadly (weapon trait) 282
deafened (condition) You’re unable to hear. 619
death (trait) An effect with the death trait kills you immediately if it reduces you to 0
HP. Some death effects can bring you closer to death or slay you outright without
reducing you to 0 HP. 461
death and dying 459–461
instant death 461
debilitation Debilitations apply conditions and other negative effects to a creature.
When the creature is affected by a new debilitation, any previous one it was
affected by ends. 181, 182
Deception (skill) Trick and mislead others. (Cha) 245–246, 506
Decipher Writing (skill action) Understand obscure or coded text. (Arcana, Occultism,
Religion, Society; trained) 234–236
dedication (trait) You must select a feat with this trait to apply an archetype to your
character. 219
Defend (exploration activity) Travel with your shield raised. 479
degrees of success The four possible outcomes of a check: critical success, success,
failure, and critical failure. 445–446
deity Deities are powerful entities that live beyond the world and grant power in the
form of spells to their truly devoted believers. 29, 437–440
champion’s deity 106–107
cleric’s deity 118
Delay [free-action](basic action) Take your turn later. 470
demon (trait) A family of fiends, demons hail from or trace their origins to the Abyss.
Most are irredeemably chaotic evil and have darkvision. 433
Demoralize [one-action](skill action) Frighten your enemies. (Intimidation) 247
Detect Magic (exploration activity) Cast detect magic at regular intervals. 479
detecting creatures 465–467
detection (trait) Effects with this trait attempt to determine the presence or location
of a person, object, or aura.
devil (trait) A family of fiends from Hell, most devils are irredeemably lawful evil. They
typically have greater darkvision, immunity to fire, and telepathy. 433
Dexterity (Dex) This ability score measures your agility and deftness. 19
Dexterity modifier cap (armor) 274
dice (singular "die") 7, 8, 279
die roll Any time you roll the dice, you’re making a roll. 10, 443–450
difficult terrain (terrain) It costs 5 extra feet of movement to enter a space of difficult
terrain, or 10 extra for greater difficult terrain. 475–476
Difficulty Class (DC) The number you need to succeed at a check. To generate a DC
from a modifier (like Perception DC), add 10 to the modifier. 445
adjusting difficulty (GM) 503–504
class DC (10 + proficiency bonus + key ability modifier) 29
counteract DC 458–459
level-based DCs (GM) 503
setting DCs (GM) 503–506
simple DCs (untrained 10, trained 15, expert 20, master 30, legendary 40) 503
spell DC (10 + spellcasting ability modifier + proficiency bonus + other bonuses +
penalties) 298, 447–448
dim light Creatures and objects in dim light are concealed. 464
dinosaur (trait) These reptiles have survived from prehistoric times.
Diplomacy (skill) Influence others through negotiation and flattery. (Cha) 246–247, 506
disability 487
Disable a Device [two-actions](skill action) Disable a trap or a similar complex mechanism.
(Thievery, trained) 253
disarm (weapon trait) 282
Disarm [one-action](skill action) Make a creature drop an item. (Athletics, trained) 243
disaster 518–519
Glossary and Index A
631
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
disbelieve Attempt to ignore an illusion. 298
disease (trait) An effect with this trait applies one or more diseases. A disease is
typically an affliction. 457–458
Dismiss [one-action](action) End a spell or magic item effect that can be dismissed. 305, 534
dispelSee also counteract. 305, 458–459
disrupting actions 462–463
disrupting item activations 532
disrupting spells 303
divination (trait) The divination school of magic typically involves obtaining or
transferring information, or predicting events. 297
divine (trait) This magic comes from the divine tradition, drawing power from deities
or similar sources. Anything with this trait is magical. 299
divine spell list 309–311
domain 441
doomed (condition) Your soul is in peril, bringing you closer to death. 619
downtime A mode of play in which characters are not adventuring. Days pass quickly
at the table, and characters engage in long-term activities. 12, 481
downtime activities 461–462, 481
running downtime (GM) 500–502
downtime (trait) An activity with this trait takes a day or more, and can be used only
during downtime. 17, 234
dragon (trait) Dragons are reptilian creatures, often winged or with the power of flight.
Most are able to use a breath weapon and are immune to sleep and paralysis. 433
dragonhide (material) 579
drained (condition) Blood loss or a similar effect has leeched your vitality. 619
draw an item See also Interact. 271, 273
Drop Prone [one-action](basic action) Fall flat on the ground. 470, 621
drop an item See also Release. 271, 273
drow (trait) Subterranean kin of the elves, drow typically have darkvision and inborn
magical abilities.
drowning and suffocation 478
druid (class) 128–139
multiclass archetype 225
order spells 399–401
primal spell list 314–315
druid (trait)  This indicates abilities from the druid class.
duergar (trait) Subterranean kin of the dwarves, duergar typically have darkvision
and immunity to poison. They are not easily fooled by illusions.
duration 455
spell durations 304–305
dwarf (trait) A creature with this trait is a member of the dwarf ancestry. Dwarves are
stout folk who often live underground and typically have darkvision. An ability
with this trait can be used or selected only by dwarves. An item with this trait is
created and used by dwarves. 34–37, 431
dying (condition) You have been reduced to O HP and are nearing death. 619
death and dying rules 459–461
Earn Income (skill action) Make money using a skill during downtime. (Crafting, Lore,
Performance; trained) 236–238
GM advice 504–505
earth (trait) Effects with the earth trait either manipulate or conjure earth. Those that
manipulate earth have no effect in an area without earth. Creatures with this trait
consist primarily of earth or have a magical connection to that element.
effect An effect is the result of an ability, though an ability’s exact effect is sometimes
contingent on the result of a check or other roll. 453–457
electricity (damage type) 452
electricity (trait) Effects with this trait deal electricity damage. A creature with this
trait has a magical connection to electricity.
elemental (trait) Elementals are creatures directly tied to an element and native to
the Elemental Planes. Elementals don’t need to breathe.
elf (trait) A creature with this trait is a member of the elf ancestry. Elves are
mysterious people with rich traditions of magic and scholarship who typically
have low-light vision. An ability with this trait can be used or selected only by
elves. A weapon with this trait is created and used by elves. 38–41, 431–432
half-elf 55, 56, 58–59
elixir (trait) Elixirs are alchemical liquids that are used by drinking them. 546–550
emanation (area) 457
emotion (trait) This effect alters a creature’s emotions. Effects with this trait always
have the mental trait as well. Creatures with special training or that have
mechanical or artificial intelligence are immune to emotion effects.
enchantment (trait) Effects and magic items with this trait are associated with
the enchantment school of magic, typically involving mind control, emotion
alteration, and other mental effects. 297
encounter A mode of play in which time is measured in 6-second rounds and
participants use precise actions. Combat takes place in encounters. 10–12, 468–478
building encounters (GM) 488–489
initiative 468
running encounters (GM) 493–496
social encounters (GM) 494–496
special battles (aerial, aquatic, mounted) 478
encumbered (condition) Too much Bulk impedes your movement. 619
energy (damage type) An umbrella category including acid, cold, electricity, fire,
force, negative, positive, and sonic damage. 452
enfeebled (condition) Your strength has been sapped away. 619
environment 512–519
environmental (trait) A hazard with this trait is something dangerous that’s part of
the natural world, such as quicksand or harmful mold.
envision (item activation component) 533
equipmentSee also items. 27, 270–295
Escape [one-action] (basic action) Attempt to get free when grabbed, restrained or
immobilized. 470
ethereal (trait) Ethereal creatures are natives of the Ethereal Plane. They can survive
the basic environmental effects of the Ethereal Plane.
ethnicities of Golarion 55, 430–431
evil (damage type) 452
evil (trait) Evil effects often manipulate energy from evil-aligned Outer Planes and are
antithetical to good divine servants or divine servants of good deities. A creature
with this trait is evil in alignment. An ability with this trait can be selected or used
only by evil creatures.
evocation (trait) Effects and magic items with this trait are associated with the
evocation school of magic, typically involving energy and elemental forces. 298
Experience Points (XP) Points that measure a player character’s progress, accrued
during play. Typically a PC gains a new level upon reaching 1,000 XP. 8
encounter budget (GM) 489
leveling up 31
XP awards (GM) 507–508
expert (proficiency rank) Add your level + 4 to associated rolls and DCs. 13, 444
exploration A mode of play used for traveling, investigating, and otherwise exploring.
The GM determines the flow of time. 10, 479–480
exploration activities 461, 479–480
running exploration (GM) 496–500
exploration (trait) An activity with this trait takes more than a turn to use, and can
usually be used only during exploration mode. 17, 234
extradimensional (trait) This effect or item creates an extradimensional space. An
extradimensional effect placed inside another extradimensional space ceases to
function until it is removed.
failure A result on a check that fails to meet the DC. Failing by 10 or more is a critical
failure. If a check has no failure entry, nothing happens on a failure. 445–446
falling When you fall more than 5 feet, you take bludgeoning damage equal to half
the distance you fell and land prone. 463–464
familiar A Tiny creature mystically bonded to you. 217–218
fascinated (condition) You must focus on one subject of your fascination. 619–620
fatal (weapon trait) 282
fatigued (condition) Your defenses are lower, and you can’t focus while exploring. 620
fear (trait) Fear effects evoke the emotion of fear. Effects with this trait always have
the mental and emotion traits as well.
feat An ability you gain or select for your character due to their ancestry, background,
class, general training, or skill training. Some feats grant special actions. 12, 18
ancestry feat 33
archetype feat 219
class feat 68
general feat 68, 255
skill feat (general feat that improves skills) 68, 255
Feint [one-action] (skill action) Misdirect someone to make them flat-footed. (Deception,
trained) 246
fey (trait) Creatures of the First World are called the fey.
fiend (trait) Creatures that hail from or have a strong connection to the evil-aligned
Core Rulebook
632
planes are called fiends. Fiends can survive the basic environmental effects of
planes in the Outer Sphere.
fighter (class) 140–153
multiclass archetype 226
fighter (trait) This indicates abilities from the fighter class.
finesse (weapon trait) 282
fire (damage type) 452
fire (trait) Effects with the fire trait deal fire damage or either conjure or manipulate
fire. Those that manipulate fire have no effect in an area without fire. Creatures
with this trait consist primarily of fire or have a magical connection to that element.
flank When two creatures are on opposite sides of their enemy, the enemy is flanked,
becoming flat-footed to those creatures. 476
flat check A d20 roll that measures pure chance. A flat check can’t have any modifiers,
bonuses, or penalties applied to it. 450
flat-footed (condition) You take a –2 circumstance penalty to AC. 620
fleeing (condition) You must run away. 620
flexible (armor trait) 275
flourish (trait) Flourish actions are actions that require too much exertion to perform
a large number in a row. You can use only 1 action with the flourish trait per turn.
Fly [one-action](specialty basic action) Move up to your fly Speed. 472
aerial combat 478
fly Speed 463
focus (spell component) 303
Focus Point If you can cast focus spells, you have a pool of Focus Points you can use
to cast them. You regain a Focus Point using the Refocus activity. 300, 302
focus spell A type of spell, specific to a class, that can be cast using Focus Points and
is automatically heightened to half your level rounded up. Focus spells always
have a descriptive term such as “domain spell” or “ki spell.” 300, 302, 386–407
Refocus (activity) 300
focused (trait) An item with this trait can give you an additional Focus Point. This
focus point is separate from your focus pool and doesn’t count toward the cap on
your focus pool. You can gain this benefit only if you have a focus pool, and there
might be restrictions on how the point can be used. You can’t gain more than 1
Focus Point per day from focused items. 535
Follow the Expert (exploration activity) Benefit from another’s skill proficiency. 479
force (damage type) 452
force (trait) Effects with this trait deal force damage or create objects made of pure
magical force.
Force Open [one-action](skill action) Physically wrench something open. (Athletics) 242
Force Open DCs (GM) 515
forceful (weapon trait) 282
formula A recipe or instructions required to Craft an item. 293–294
formula book (alchemist) 73, 81
Fortitude (Fort) A type of saving throw used to resist diseases, poisons, and other
physical effects. Fortitude modifier = Con modifier + proficiency bonus + other
bonuses + penalties. 13, 449
fortune (trait) A fortune effect beneficially alters how you roll your dice. You can
never have more than one fortune effect alter a single roll. If multiple fortune
effects would apply, you have to pick which to use. If a fortune effect and a
misfortune effect would apply to the same roll, the two cancel each other out,
and you roll normally. 449
free action ([free-action]) An action you can use without spending one of your actions. Free
actions with triggers can be used at any time, but they don’t use up your 1 reaction
per round. 17, 461–462
free-hand (weapon trait) 282–283
frequency An ability that can’t be used at will might list a frequency. 18
friendly (condition) An NPC with this condition has a good attitude toward you. 620
frightened (condition) Fear makes you less capable of attacking and defending. 620
fumble A colloquial term for a critical failure. 445
fungus (trait) Fungal creatures have the fungus trait. They are distinct from normal fungi.
Game Master (GM) The player who adjudicates the rules and narrates the elements
of the Pathfinder story and world that the other players explore. 12, 482–529
Gargantuan (size) 473–475
Gather Information (skill action) Socialize to learn things. (Diplomacy) 246
GM advice 505
gearSee also item. 270–295
gender and pronouns 29
general (trait) A type of feat that any character can select, regardless of ancestry and
class, as long as they meet the prerequisites. You can select a feat with this trait
when your class grants a general feat. 255
giant (trait) Giants are massive humanoid creatures. 433–434
GM (Game Master)See also Game Master. 12, 482–529
gnome (trait) A creature with this trait is a member of the gnome ancestry. Gnomes
are small people skilled at magic who seek out new experiences and usually have
low-light vision. An ability with this trait can be used or selected only by gnomes.
A weapon with this trait is created and used by gnomes. 42–45, 432
goblin (trait) A creature with this trait can come from multiple tribes of creatures,
including goblins, hobgoblins, and bugbears. Goblins tend to have darkvision. An
ability with this trait can be used or chosen only by goblins. A weapon with this
trait is created and used by goblins. 46–49, 432
godsSee also deity. 437–440
Golarion The world of the Pathfinder setting. 12, 416–441
gold piece (gp) 271
good (damage type) 452
good (trait) Good effects often manipulate energy from good-aligned Outer Planes
and are antithetical to evil divine servants or divine servants of evil deities. A
creature with this trait is good in alignment. An ability with this trait can be
selected or used only by good creatures.
gp (gold piece) 271
Grab an Edge [reaction](specialty basic action) Try to catch yourself while falling. 472
grabbed (condition) A creature, object, or magic holds you in place. 620
Grapple [one-action](skill action) Grab or restrain a creature. (Athletics) 242
grapple (weapon trait) 283
grid A map with 1-inch squares used for indicating position and movement. 473
playing without a grid (GM) 494
hag (trait) These creatures are malevolent spellcasters who form covens.
half-elf (trait) A creature with this trait is part human and part elf. An ability with this
trait can be used or selected only by half-elves. 55, 56, 58–59
half-orc (trait) A creature with this trait is part human and part orc. An ability with
this trait can be used or selected only by half-orcs. 55, 56, 58–59
halfling (trait) A creature with this trait is a member of the halfling ancestry. These
small people are friendly wanderers considered to be lucky. An ability with this
trait can be used or selected only by halflings. A weapon with this trait is created
and used by halflings. 50–53, 432
Hardness A statistic representing an object’s durability. 272, 579
haunt (trait) A hazard with this trait is a spiritual echo, often of someone with a tragic
death. Putting a haunt to rest often involves resolving the haunt’s unfinished
business. A haunt that hasn’t been properly put to rest always returns after a time. 
hazard Hazards are non-creature dangers that adventurers encounter during their
journeys, including environmental hazards, haunts, and traps. Simple hazards
have a one-time effect, but negotiating a complex hazard takes place in encounter
mode, wherein the hazard has a specific routine. 498, 520–529
complex hazards 526–529
simple hazards 522–526
XP for hazards 507–508, 521
hazardous terrain (terrain) You take damage when moving through this terrain. 476
healing 459
long-term rest (downtime) 481
Medicine skill 248–249
natural healing 480
healing (trait) A healing effect restores a creature’s body, typically by restoring Hit
Points, but sometimes by removing diseases or other debilitating effects.
helpful (condition) An NPC with this condition is likely to assist you. 620
heritage A choice made to further define your ancestry. 33
Hero Point These points last only within a session. You can spend 1 Hero Point to
reroll a check, or all your Hero Points to avoid dying. 29, 467
awarding Hero Points (GM) 507
hidden (condition) A creature knows your location but can’t see you. 466, 620
Hide [one-action](skill action) Make yourself hidden. (Stealth) 251–252
High Jump [two-actions](skill action) Jump vertically. (Athletics) 242
Hit Points (HP) A statistic representing the amount of physical harm a creature can
take before it falls unconscious or dies. Damage decreases Hit Points on a 1-to-1
basis, while healing restores Hit Points at the same rate. 12, 26, 67–68, 459–461
ancestry Hit Points 33
class Hit Points 67–68
item Hit Points 272–273, 461
Glossary and Index A
633
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
temporary Hit Points 461
hostile (condition) An NPC with this condition is likely to attack you. 620
hostile action 305
HP (Hit Points)See also Hit Points. 12, 26, 67–68, 459–461
Huge (size) 473–475
human (trait) A creature with this trait is a member of the human ancestry. Humans
are a diverse array of people known for their adaptability. An ability with this trait
can be used or selected only by humans. 54–59, 430–431
humanoid (trait) Humanoid creatures reason and act much like humans. They
typically stand upright and have two arms and two legs.
Hustle (exploration activity) Move at double your travel Speed. 480
Identify Alchemy (skill action) Determine specifics of alchemy. (Crafting, trained) 245
Identify Magic (skill action) Determine specifics of magic. (Arcana, Nature, Occultism,
Religion; trained) 238
GM advice 505
illusion (trait) Effects and magic items with this trait are associated with the illusion
school of magic, typically involving false sensory stimuli. 298
immobilized (condition) You can’t move. 620
immunity An immunity causes a creature to ignore all damage, effects, or conditions
of a certain type. 451–453
object immunities 273
temporary immunity 453
Impersonate (skill action) Pass yourself off as someone else. (Deception) 245–246
imprecise sense A sense that can make creatures hidden, but not observed, such as
human hearing. 464
incapacitation (trait) An ability with this trait can take a character completely out of
the fight or even kill them, and it’s harder to use on a more powerful character.
If a spell has the incapacitation trait, any creature of more than twice the spell’s
level treats the result of their check to prevent being incapacitated by the spell
as one degree of success better, or the result of any check the spellcaster made
to incapacitate them as one degree of success worse. If any other effect has the
incapacitation trait, a creature of higher level than the item, creature, or hazard
generating the effect gains the same benefits.
incline (terrain) You must Climb up an incline. 476
indifferent (condition) An NPC with this condition neither likes nor dislikes you. 620
infused (trait) 72, 75
ingested (trait) This poison is delivered when drunk or eaten. 550
inhaled (trait) This poison is delivered when breathed in. 550
initiative At the start of an encounter, all participants involved roll for initiative to
determine the order in which they act. 13, 468, 498–499
Delay (basic action) 470
injury (trait) This poison is delivered by damaging the recipient. 550
Intelligence (Int) This ability score measures your reason and intellect. 19
Interact [one-action](basic action) Grab or manipulate an object. 470
item activation component 533
Intimidation (skill) Bend others to your will using threats. (Cha) 247, 506
Invest an Item (activity) Invest your energy in an item as you don it. 531
invested (trait) A character can wear only 10 magical items that have the invested
trait. None of the magical effects of the item apply if the character hasn’t invested
it, nor can it be activated, though the character still gains any normal benefits
from wearing the physical item (like a hat keeping rain off their head). 531
Investigate (exploration activity) Study your surroundings. 480
invisible (condition) Creatures can’t see you. 467, 620–621
item An object you carry, hold, or use. Items sometimes grant an item bonus or
penalty to certain checks. 270–295, 530–617
activating alchemical and magical items 532–534
alchemical items 543–554
armor 274–276, 555–558
Bulk 271–272
buying and selling (GM) 502
carrying, wearing, and wielding 271–272
Crafting 244–245
formulas 293–294
investing magic items 531
item bonus or penalty 444–445
item damage 272–273
item level 271, 534
magic items 531–535
materials 577–579
rarity 534
runes 580–585
shields 277, 586–588
shoddy 273
sizes 295
treasure tables (GM) 536–542
weapons 278–286, 599–602
item bonus A bonus that comes from an item. 444–445
item penalty A penalty that comes from an item. 444–445
jousting (weapon trait) 283
key ability Your key ability is the ability score you use to determine your class DC, as
well as your spell attack roll and spell DC if you’re a spellcaster. A key ability for a
skill is the ability modifier used for that skill. 67, 233
knocked out When reduced to 0 HP, you fall unconscious and start dying. 459–460
language 65, 432
Large (size) 473–475
lawful (damage type) 452
lawful (trait) Lawful effects often manipulate energy from law-aligned Outer Planes
and are antithetical to chaotic divine servants or divine servants of chaotic deities.
A creature with this trait is lawful in alignment. An ability with this trait can be
selected or used by lawful creatures only.
Leap [one-action] (basic action) Jump horizontally 10 feet (15 feet if your Speed is 30 feet or
more), or vertically 3 feet and horizontally 5 feet. 470
Learn a Spell (skill action) Learn a new spell. (Arcana, Nature, Occultism, Religion;
trained) 238
GM advice 505
legendary (proficiency rank) Add your level + 8 to associated rolls and DCs. 13, 444
leshy These are small plant creatures, roughly humanoid in form. 434
level A number that measures something’s overall power. A character has a level from
1st to 20th, and other aspects of the game also have levels. 13, 271, 534
counteract level 458–459
leveling up 31
spell level (spells range in level from 1–10)
Lie (skill action) Trick someone with a falsehood. (Deception) 246
light (trait) Light effects overcome non-magical darkness in the area, and can
counteract (pages 458–459) magical darkness. You must usually target darkness
magic with your light magic directly to counteract the darkness, but some light
spells automatically attempt to counteract darkness.
light and darkness 301, 464
line (area) 457
line of effect 304, 457
line of sight 457
linguistic (trait) An effect with this trait depends on language comprehension. A
linguistic effect that targets a creature works only if the target understands the
language you are using.
litany (trait) Litanies are special devotion spells, typically used by champions and
requiring a single action, that usually give temporary immunity to further litanies.
Long Jump [two-actions](skill action) Jump horizontally. (Athletics) 242–243
Lore (skill) Know specialized information on a narrow topic. (Int) 247–248
low-light vision (sense) See in dim light as though it were bright light. 465
magicSee also spell, item. 297–306
magic item See also item. 531–617
magical (trait) Something with the magical trait is imbued with magical energies not
tied to a specific tradition of magic. A magical item radiates a magic aura infused
with its dominant school of magic.
Some items or effects are closely tied to a particular tradition of magic. In
these cases, the item has the arcane, divine, occult, or primal trait instead of the
magical trait. Any of these traits indicate that the item is magical. 535
magical hazards 520–522
magical tradition Arcane, divine, occult, and primal are the traditions of magic. 299
Make an Impression (skill action) Change someone’s attitude. (Diplomacy) 246–247
Maneuver in Flight [one-action] (skill action) Execute a difficult movement while flying.
(Acrobatics, trained) 240–241
manipulate (trait) You must physically manipulate an item or make gestures to use
an action with this trait. Creatures without a suitable appendage can’t perform
actions with this trait. Manipulate actions often trigger reactions.
master (proficiency rank) Add your level + 6 to associated rolls and DCs. 13, 444
Core Rulebook
634
material (spell component) 303
materials 577–579
mechanical (trait) A hazard with this trait is a constructed physical object. 521, 522
Medicine (skill) Heal people and help them recover from afflictions. (Wis) 248–249
Medium (size) 473–475
mental (damage type) 452
mental (trait) A mental effect can alter the target’s mind. It has no effect on an object
or a mindless creature.
metamagic (trait) Actions with the metamagic trait, usually from metamagic feats,
tweak the properties of your spells. You must use a metamagic action directly
before Casting the Spell you want to alter. If you use any action (including free
actions and reactions) other than Cast a Spell directly after, you waste the benefits
of the metamagic action. Any additional effects added by a metamagic action are
part of the spell’s effect, not of the metamagic action itself. 304
mindless (trait) A mindless creature has either programmed or rudimentary mental
attributes. Most, if not all, of their mental ability modifiers are –5. They are
immune to all mental effects. 
minion (trait) Minions are creatures that directly serve another creature. A creature
with this trait can use only 2 actions per turn and can’t use reactions. Your minion
acts on your turn in combat, once per turn, when you spend an action to issue it
commands. For an animal companion, you Command an Animal; for a minion that’s
a spell or magic item effect, like a summoned minion, you Sustain a Spell or Sustain
an Activation; if not otherwise specified, you issue a verbal command, a single action
with the auditory and concentrate traits. If given no commands, minions use no
actions except to defend themselves or to escape obvious harm. If left unattended
for long enough, typically 1 minute, mindless minions usually don’t act, animals
follow their instincts, and sapient minions act how they please.
misfortune (trait) A misfortune effect detrimentally alters how you roll your dice.
You can never have more than one misfortune effect alter a single roll. If multiple
misfortune effects would apply, the GM decides which is worse and applies it. If a
fortune effect and a misfortune effect would apply to the same roll, the two cancel
each other out, and you roll normally. 449
mithral (material) 579
mode of play The three types of playing the game—encounters, exploration, and
downtime—each has a different time scale and degree of rules precision. 10–12,
468–481
running modes of play (GM) 493
modifier A value added to a calculation that can be positive or negative. 444–445
ability modifier 20
monitor (trait) Creatures that hail from or have a strong connection to the neutrally
aligned planes are called monitors. Monitors can survive the basic environmental
effects of planes in the Outer Sphere.
monk (class) 154–165
ki spells 157, 401–402
multiclass archetype 227
monk (trait) Abilities with this trait are from the monk class. A weapon with this trait
is primarily used by monks.
monster A monster is a creature that is typically inhuman and serves to thwart the
PCs in some way. Beneficial monsters are exceptions in most games. The GM plays
the role of any monster the PCs encounter. 8
monster identification 238–239, 506
morph (trait) Effects that slightly alter a creature’s form have the morph trait. Any
Strikes specifically granted by a morph effect are magical. You can be affected
by multiple morph spells at once, but if you morph the same body part more
than once, the second morph effect attempts to counteract the first (in the same
manner as two polymorph effects, described in that trait).
Your morph effects might also end if you are polymorphed and the polymorph
effect invalidates or overrides your morph effect. The GM determines which morph
effects can be used together and which can’t.
Mount [one-action](specialty basic action) Get on an allied creature to ride it. 472
mount An animal companion with this special ability supports its rider. 214
mounted combat 478
move (trait) An action with this trait involves moving from one space to another. 474
movement 463–464
forced movement 475
in encounters and on a grid 473–477
movement without a grid 494
special movement types 463
Speed (land Speed) 13, 24, 463
multiclass (trait) Archetypes with the multiclass trait represent diversifying your
training into another class’s specialties. You can’t select a multiclass archetype’s
dedication feat if you are a member of the class of the same name. 219
multiple attack penalty You take this penalty on all attacks after the first on your
turn. This is a –5 penalty on your second attack and –10 on all subsequent attacks
(or –4 and –8 if your weapon or unarmed attack has the agile trait). 446
multiplying 444
mutagen (trait) An elixir with the mutagen trait temporarily transmogrifies the
subject’s body and alters its mind. A mutagen always conveys one or more
beneficial effects paired with one or more detrimental effects. Mutagens are
polymorph effects, meaning you can benefit from only one at a time.
narrow surface (terrain) You must Balance to cross a narrow surface. 476
natural 1, natural 20 When you roll a d20 and the number on the die is a 1, decrease
your degree of success by one step. When the number is a 20, increase the degree
of success by one step. 445–446
natural disaster 518–519
Nature (skill) Know about the natural world and primal magic. (Wis) 249
necromancy (trait) Effects and magic items with this trait are associated with the
necromancy school of magic, typically involving forces of life and death. 298
negative (damage type) 452
negative (trait) Effects with this trait heal undead creatures with negative energy,
deal negative damage to living creatures, or manipulate negative energy.
noisy (armor trait) 275
nonlethal (weapon trait) 283
nonlethal attack 453
nonplayer character (NPC) A character controlled by the GM. 13
oath (trait) 109
objectSee also item. 271–273
observed (condition) You’re in clear view. 466, 621
occult (trait) This magic comes from the occult tradition, calling upon bizarre and
ephemeral mysteries. Anything with this trait is magical. 299
occult spell list 311–314
Occultism (skill) Know about philosophies, mysticism, and occult magic. (Int) 249–250
oil (trait) Oils are magical gels, ointments, pastes, or salves that are typically applied
to an object and are used up in the process. 561–562
onset The delay before an affliction, elixir, or potion takes effect. 458, 534
ooze (trait) Oozes are creatures with simple anatomies. They tend to have low mental
ability scores and immunity to mental effects and precision damage. 
open (trait) These maneuvers work only as the first salvo on your turn. You can use an
open only if you haven’t used an action with the attack or open trait yet this turn.
orc (trait) A creature with this trait is a member of the orc ancestry. These
green-skinned people tend to have darkvision. An ability with this trait can be used
or selected only by orcs. An item with this trait is created and used by orcs. 434
half-orc 55, 56, 58–59
orichalcum (material) 579
paladin A lawful good champion. 106
Palm an Object [one-action](skill action) Take an object without being noticed. (Thievery) 253
paralyzed (condition) You can’t move or fully defend yourself. 621
parry (weapon trait) 283
party order 497
Pathfinder Society An organized play campaign played all over the world. 492
Golarion organization 417, 436
PC (player character)See also player character. 13
penalty A negative value added to a calculation. Add only the worst penalty of a
single type (circumstance, item, status). 12, 444–445
multiple attack penalty (–5 on your second attack, –10 on further attacks) 446
range penalty 279, 446–447
Perception A statistic measuring your ability to notice hidden objects or unusual
situations. Perception is usually used for initiative rolls. Perception modifier = Wis
modifier + proficiency bonus + other bonuses + penalties. 13, 27, 448, 464–467
initiative 448, 468
Perform (skill action) Impress people with a performance. (Performance) 250
Performance (skill) Use your talents to put on a show. (Cha) 250, 506
persistent damage (condition) You keep taking damage every round. 621
petrified (condition) You’ve been turned to stone. 621
physical (damage type) An umbrella category including bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing damage. 452
Glossary and Index A
635
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
Pick a Lock [two-actions](skill action) Open a lock. (Thievery, trained) 253
piercing (damage type) A type of physical damage. 452
plane 418–419
plant (trait) Vegetable creatures have the plant trait. They are distinct from normal
plants. Magical effects with this trait manipulate or conjure plants or plant matter
in some way. Those that manipulate plants have no effect in an area with no plants.
platinum piece (pp) 271
player One of the real people playing the game. 7
Player Character (character or PC) A character created and controlled by a player
other than the GM. 13
character creation 19–30
Point Out [one-action](specialty basic action) Indicate an undetected creature’s location. 472
poison (damage type) 452
poison (trait) An effect with this trait delivers a poison or deals poison damage. An
item with this trait is poisonous and might cause an affliction. 457–458, 550—554
polymorph (trait) These effects transform the target into a new form. A target can’t
be under the effect of more than one polymorph effect at a time. If it comes under
the effect of a second polymorph effect, the second polymorph effect attempts
to counteract the first. If it succeeds, it takes effect, and if it fails, the spell has
no effect on that target. Any Strikes specifically granted by a polymorph effect
are magical. Unless otherwise stated, polymorph spells don’t allow the target to
take on the appearance of a specific individual creature, but rather just a generic
creature of a general type or ancestry.
If you take on a battle form with a polymorph spell, the special statistics can
be adjusted only by circumstance bonuses, status bonuses, and penalties. Unless
otherwise noted, the battle form prevents you from casting spells, speaking,
and using most manipulate actions that require hands. (If there’s doubt about
whether you can use an action, the GM decides.) Your gear is absorbed into you;
the constant abilities of your gear still function, but you can’t activate any items.
positive (damage type) 452
positive (trait) Effects with this trait heal living creatures with positive energy, deal
positive energy damage to undead, or manipulate positive energy.
possession (trait) Effects with this trait allow a creature to project its mind and spirit
into a target. A creature immune to mental effects can’t use a possession effect.
While possessing a target, a possessor’s true body is unconscious (and can’t wake
up normally), unless the possession effect allows the creature to physically enter
the target. Whenever the target takes damage, the possessor takes half that
amount of damage as mental damage.
A possessor loses the benefits of any of its active spells or abilities that affect
its physical body, though it gains the benefits of the target’s active spells and
abilities that affect their body. A possessor can use any of the target’s abilities
that are purely physical, and it can’t use any of its own abilities except spells and
purely mental abilities. The GM decides whether an ability is purely physical or
purely mental. A possessor uses the target’s attack modifier, AC, Fortitude save,
Reflex save, Perception, and physical skills, and its own Will save, mental skills,
spell attack roll, and spell DC; benefits of invested items apply where relevant
(the possessor’s invested items apply when using its own values, and the target’s
invested items apply when using the target’s values). A possessor gains no benefit
from casting spells that normally affect only the caster, since it isn’t in its own body.
The possessor must use its own actions to make the possessed creature act.
If a possessor reaches 0 Hit Points through any combination of damage to its
true body and mental damage from the possession, it is knocked out as normal
and the possession immediately ends. If the target reaches 0 Hit Points first, the
possessor can either fall unconscious with the body and continue the possession
or end the effect as a free action and return to its body. If the target dies, the
possession ends immediately and the possessor is stunned for 1 minute.
potion (trait) A potion is a magical liquid activated when you drink it. 562–564
pp (platinum piece) 271
precious (trait) Valuable materials with special properties have the precious trait.
They can be substituted for base materials when you Craft items. 577–579
armor and weapons made of precious materials. 555–556, 599
damage from precious materials 452
precise sense A sense that can make creatures observed, such as human sight. 464
precision (damage type) A type of damage that increases the attack’s listed damage,
using the same damage type, rather than adding a separate amount. 452
prediction (trait) Effects with this trait determine what is likely to happen in the near
future. Most predictions are divinations.
preparationsSee also daily preparations. 480, 500
prerequisite Many feats and other abilities can be taken only if you meet their
prerequisites. Prerequisites are often feats or proficiency ranks. 18
press (trait) Actions with this trait allow you to follow up earlier attacks. An action
with the press trait can be used only if you are currently affected by a multiple
attack penalty. Some actions with the press trait also grant an effect on a failure.
The effects that are added on a failure don’t apply on a critical failure. If your press
action succeeds, you can choose to apply the failure effect instead. (For example,
you may wish to do this when an attack deals no damage due to resistance.)
Because a press action requires a multiple attack penalty, you can’t use one when
it’s not your turn, even if you use the Ready activity.
Price The amount of currency it usually costs to purchase an item. 271, 535
primal (trait) This magic comes from the primal tradition, connecting to the natural
world and instinct. Anything with this trait is magical. 299
primal spell list 314–315
proficiency A measure of a character’s aptitude at a specific task or quality, with
five ranks: untrained, trained, expert, master, and legendary. Proficiency gives
a proficiency bonus. Being untrained adds a +0 bonus. Being trained, expert,
master, or legendary adds your level plus 2, 4, 6, or 8, respectively. 13, 444
initial proficiencies 26, 68
minimum proficiency for hazards 520–522
prone (condition) You’re lying on the ground and easier to attack. 621
propulsive (weapon trait) 283
quickened (condition) You get an extra action each turn. 622
rage (trait) 87
Raise a Shield [one-action](specialty basic action) Gain your shield’s bonus to AC. 472
range 304, 455
range increment 279, 446–447
ranger (class) 166–177
multiclass archetype 228
ranger (trait)  This indicates abilities from the ranger class.
rare (trait) This rarity indicates that a rules element is very difficult to find in the
game world. A rare feat, spell, item or the like is available to players only if the
GM decides to include it in the game, typically through discovery during play. 13
rarity How often something is encountered in the game world. The rarities are common,
uncommon, rare, and unique. Anything that doesn’t list a rarity is common. 13, 535
GM advice 488
reach (weapon trait) 283
reaction ([reaction]) An action you can use even if it’s not your turn. You can use 1 reaction
per round. 17, 461–462, 472–473
Ready [two-actions](basic action) Prepare an action to use when it’s not your turn. 470
Recall Knowledge [one-action](skill action) Try to remember something using a skill. 238–239
GM advice 505–506
recovery check A flat check made to see if you get worse or better while dying. 459
Reflex (Ref) A type of saving throw used to quickly dodge. Reflex modifier = Dex
modifier + proficiency bonus + other bonuses + penalties. 13, 448–449
Refocus (activity) Regain 1 focus point. 300
Release [free-action](basic action) Let go of something you’re holding. 470–471
Religion (skill) Know about deities, faith, and divine magic. (Wis) 250
reload 279
Repair (skill action) Fix a broken or damaged item. (Crafting) 243–244
Repeat a Spell (exploration activity) Repeatedly Cast a Spell as you move. 480
Request [one-action](skill action) Convince someone to do you a favor. (Diplomacy) 247
reroll An ability that causes you to roll again has the fortune or misfortune trait. 499, 467
resistance Reduce damage you take of a certain type. 453
rest Characters recover HP (normally Con modifier × level) and resources with 8
hours of sleep. 480, 499–500
GM advice 499–500, 502
long-term rest 481
restrained (condition) You are bound by restraints or a grappling creature. 622
result of a check 445
retrain You can retrain during downtime to change character choices. 481
GM advice 502
revelation (trait) Effects with this trait see things as they truly are.
rewards 507–511
ritual A type of spell that takes downtime to cast and doesn’t use spell slots. 408–415
rogue (class) 178–189
multiclass archetype 229
rogue (trait)  This indicates abilities from the rogue class.
Core Rulebook
636
roleplaying Describing a character’s actions, often while acting from the perspective
of the character. 13
roleplaying game (RPG) An interactive story where one player, the Game Master
(GM), sets the scene and presents challenges, while other players take the roles of
player characters (PCs) and attempt to overcome those challenges. 7
roll Any time you roll the dice, you’re making a roll. The most common type of roll is a
check (comparing a d20 plus modifiers against a DC). 10, 443–450
round A period of time during an encounter in which all participants get a chance
to act. A round represents approximately 6 seconds in game time. 13, 468–469
durations measured in rounds 304
rounding 444
RPG (roleplaying game) 7
rune 580–585
runestone 571
saving throw (check) A roll made to avoid or mitigate a dangerous effect. You roll a
save automatically, with no action or a reaction. The character who isn’t acting
rolls the d20 for a saving throw, and the creature who is acting provides the DC.
There are three types of saves: Fortitude, Reflex, and Will. 13, 27, 305, 448–449
basic saving throw 305, 449
scent (sense) Sense things using smell as an imprecise sense with a limited range. 465
school Magic is divided into eight schools: abjuration, conjuration, divination,
enchantment, evocation, illusion, necromancy, and transmutation. 297–298
Scout (exploration activity) Look ahead for danger. 480
scroll (trait) A scroll contains a single spell you can cast without a spell slot. 564–565
scrying (trait) A scrying effect lets you see, hear, or otherwise get sensory information
from a distance using a sensor or apparatus, rather than your own eyes and ears.
Search (exploration activity) Look for hidden things. 480
secret (trait) The GM rolls the check for this ability in secret. 450
Seek [one-action](basic action) Scan an area for creatures or objects using Perception. 471
Sense Direction [one-action](skill action) Figure out your precise location. (Survival) 252
GM advice 506
Sense Motive [one-action](basic action) Determine if a creature is lying. 471
senses 464–465
session A Pathfinder game session usually last a few hours. 7, 489–491
shadow (trait) This magic involves shadows or the energy of the Shadow Plane.
shield 277
magic and special shields 586–588
Raise a Shield action 472
Shield Block reaction 266
shove (weapon trait) 283
Shove [one-action](skill action) Push a creature. (Athletics) 243
sickened (condition) You’re sick to your stomach. 622
silver (material) 579
silver piece (sp) 271
single action ([one-action]) An action that takes one of your three actions on your turn. 17, 461
size A creature can be Tiny, Small, Medium, Large, Huge, or Gargantuan. 473–474
item size 295
skill A statistic representing the ability to perform certain tasks that require
instruction or practice. Skill modifier = modifier of the skill’s key ability score +
proficiency bonus + other bonuses + penalties. 13, 28, 233–253
Aid (reaction used to grant a bonus to an ally’s check) 470
check penalty (from armor) 234, 274
DCs (GM advice) 504–506
general skill actions 234–240
skill feat (a type of general feat related to skills) 68, 255
skill increase 68
skill (trait) A general feat with the skill trait improves your skills and their actions
or gives you new actions for a skill. A feat with this trait can be selected when
a class grants a skill feat or general feat. Archetype feats with the skill trait can
be selected in place of a skill feat if you have that archetype’s dedication feat.
219, 255
slashing (damage type) A type of physical damage. 452
sleep (trait) This effect can cause a creature to fall asleep or get drowsy.
slowed (condition) You lose actions each turn. 622
Small (size) 473–475
snare (trait) Traps typically made by rangers, snares follow special rules that allow
them to be constructed quickly and used on the battlefield. 266, 589–591
Sneak [one-action](skill action) Move quietly while hidden. (Stealth) 252
Society (skill) Know about civilization, culture, and history. (Int) 250–251
somatic (spell component) 303
sonic (damage type) 452
sonic (trait) An effect with the sonic trait functions only if it makes sound, meaning
it has no effect in an area of silence or in a vacuum. This is different from an
auditory spell, which is effective only if the target can hear it. A sonic effect might
deal sonic damage.
sorcerer (class) 190–201
bloodline spells 194–195, 402–406
multiclass archetype 230
spell lists 307–315
sorcerer (trait)  This indicates abilities from the sorcerer class.
sp (silver piece) 271
space The squares a creature takes up on a grid. 473–474
speaking 471
specialty basic action 472
Speed A measure of the distance a character can move using a single action,
measured in feet. See also movement. 13, 463
burrow, climb, fly, and swim Speeds 463
movement on a grid 473–476
Speed penalty from armor 274
Step and Stride actions 471
travel Speed 479
spell A magical effect created by performing mystical incantations and gestures
known only to those with special training or inborn abilities. 13, 297–415
areas 304
attacking with a spell 298, 305
cantrips 300
casting spells and the Cast a Spell activity 302–303
components 303
counteracting 305
disrupting 303
durations 304–305, 499
focus spells (bloodline spells, composition spells, devotion spells, domain spells, ki
spells, order spells, and school spells) 300–302, 386–407
heightening 299
identifying 238, 305
innate 302
prepared 298
ranges 304
rituals 408–415
school 297–298
spell descriptions 316–385
spell level (spells range in level from 1 to 10)
spell lists 307–315
spell repertoire (the spells a spontaneous spellcaster knows) 96–97, 193
spell attack roll (spellcasting ability modifier + proficiency bonus + other bonuses
+ penalties) 298
spell DC (10 + spellcasting ability modifier + proficiency bonus + other bonuses +
penalties) 298
spell slots 298–299
spontaneous 298–299
targets 304
traditions (arcane, divine, occult, and primal) 297, 299
triggers 305–306
walls 306
spellbook 204, 206, 288, 297
spellcaster A spellcaster is a character whose class or archetype grants them the
spellcasting class feature. The ability to cast focus spells or innate spells does not
by itself make a character a spellcaster.
spell attack roll You attempt a spell attack roll when targeting a creature with aimed
magic. Your multiple attack penalty applies. Spell attack roll modifier = spellcasting
ability modifier + proficiency bonus + other bonuses + penalties. 298, 305, 447–448
spell DC Your spell DC measures how hard it is to resist your spells with saving throws
or to counteract them. Spell DC = 10 + spellcasting ability modifier + proficiency
bonus + other bonuses + penalties. 298, 448
spirit (trait) Spirits are ephemeral creatures defined by their spiritual self and often
lacking a physical form.
Glossary and Index A
637
Introduction
Ancestries &
Backgrounds
Classes
Skills
Feats
Equipment
Spells
The Age of
Lost OMENS
Playing the
Game
Game
mastering
Crafting
& Treasure
Appendix
splash (trait) When you use a thrown weapon with the splash trait, you don’t add
your Strength modifier to the damage roll. If an attack with a splash weapon fails,
succeeds, or critically succeeds, all creatures within 5 feet of the target (including
the target) take the listed splash damage. On a failure (but not a critical failure),
the target of the attack still takes the splash damage. Add splash damage together
with the initial damage against the target before applying the target’s weaknesses
or resistances. You don’t multiply splash damage on a critical hit. 544
Squeeze (skill action) Move through a gap while exploring. (Acrobatics, trained) 241
staff (trait) This magic item holds spells of a particular theme and allows a spellcaster
to cast additional spells by preparing the staff. 592–595
stage One of the steps of an affliction. 458
stance (trait) A stance is a general combat strategy that you enter by using an
action with the stance trait, and that you remain in for some time. A stance lasts
until you get knocked out, until its requirements (if any) are violated, until the
encounter ends, or until you enter a new stance, whichever comes first. After you
use an action with the stance trait, you can’t use another one for 1 round. You can
enter or be in a stance only in encounter mode.
Stand [one-action](basic action) Stand up from prone. 471
starvation and thirst 500
status bonus A bonus that typically comes from a spell or condition and represents a
beneficial status. 444–445
status penalty A penalty that typically comes from a spell or condition and represents
a detrimental status. 444–445
staves 280, 592–595
Steal [one-action](skill action) Pilfer an object in someone else’s possession. (Thievery) 253
Stealth (skill) Avoid detection and conceal items. (Dex) 251–252
Step [one-action](basic action) Move 5 feet without triggering reactions. 471
Strength (Str) This ability score measures your brawn. 19
armor Strength score 274
Stride [one-action](basic action) Move up to your Speed. 471
Strike [one-action](basic action) Make an attack with a weapon or unarmed attack. 471
structure (trait) 596
structures 515, 596
stunned (condition) You can’t act for a number of actions or an amount of time. 622
stupefied (condition) Your can’t access your full mental faculties, and you have
trouble casting spells. 622
Subsist (skill action) Find food and shelter for free. (Society or Survival) 240
GM advice 506
success A result on a check that equals or exceeds the DC. Exceeding the DC by 10
or more is even better—a critical success. If a stat block has no success entry, that
means there is no effect on a success. 445–446
suffocation 478
summoned (trait) A creature called by a conjuration spell or effect gains the
summoned trait. A summoned creature can’t summon other creatures, create
things of value, or cast spells that require a cost. It has the minion trait. If it tries to
cast a spell of equal or higher level than the spell that summoned it, it overpowers
the summoning magic, causing the summoned creature’s spell to fail and the
summon spell to end. Otherwise, the summoned creature uses the standard
abilities for a creature of its kind. It generally attacks your enemies to the best of
its abilities. If you can communicate with it, you can attempt to command it, but
the GM determines the degree to which it follows your commands.
Immediately when you finish Casting the Spell, the summoned creature uses
its 2 actions for that turn. Summoned creatures can be banished by various spells
and effects. They are automatically banished if reduced to 0 Hit Points or if the
spell that called them ends.
Support [one-action] Direct your animal companion to support you. 215
surprise attack 499–500
Survival (skill) Travel and survive in the wild. (Wis) 252–253
Sustain a Spell [one-action](action) Extend a spell with a sustained duration. 304
Sustain an Activation [one-action] (action) Extend a magic item activation with a sustained
duration to the end of your next turn. 534
sustained A spell with this duration can be extended with Sustain a Spell. 304
sweep (weapon trait) 283
Swim [one-action](skill action) Move through the water. (Athletics) 243
aquatic combat 478
swim Speed 463
Take Cover [one-action](basic action) Gain cover, or improve cover to greater cover. 471
talisman (trait) A talisman is a small object affixed to armor, a shield, or a weapon (called
the affixed item). You must be wielding or wearing an item to activate a talisman
attached to it. Once activated, a talisman burns out permanently. 565–570
target 304, 455–456
teleportation (trait) Teleportation effects allow you to instantaneously move from
one point in space to another. Teleportation does not usually trigger reactions
based on movement.
temporary Hit Points 461
temporary immunity An effect that makes a creature temporarily immune lets that
creature avoid new effects of the same name, but it doesn’t end anything caused
by the effect that gave the temporary immunity. 453
terrain 475–476, 497–498
environment 512–517
Thievery (skill) Steal objects and dismantle locks and other mechanisms. (Dex) 253
thirst 500
thrown (weapon trait) 283
Tiny (size) 473–475
tool alchemical tool 554
tools and kits 288
touch A spell range requiring you to touch the target. 304
Track (skill action) Follow a creature’s tracks. (Survival) 252–253
GM advice 506
tradition A fundamental category of magic (arcane, divine, occult, or primal). 297, 299
Train Animal (general feat) 268, 506
trained (proficiency rank) Add your level + 2 to associated rolls and DCs. Some skill
actions and many other rules require you to be trained. 13, 444
trait A keyword that conveys information about a rules element. Often a trait indicates
how other rules interact with an ability, creature, item, or other rules element with
that trait. Individual traits appear by name in this appendix. 13
armor traits 274–275
weapon traits 282–283
transmutation (trait) Effects and magic items with this trait are associated with the
transmutation school of magic, typically changing something’s form. 298
trap (trait) A hazard or item with this trait is constructed to hinder interlopers. 520—522
travel Speed 479
treasureSee also item. 508–511, 530–617
treasure tables 536–542
Treat Disease (skill action) Remedy a disease in downtime. (Medicine, trained) 248
Treat Poison [one-action] (skill action) Help a poisoned patient recover. (Medicine, trained)
248–249
Treat Wounds (skill action) Restore Hit Points to a creature. (Medicine, trained) 249
tremorsense (sense) Detect the movement of creatures along surfaces. 465
trigger A specified event when you can use a reaction or free action. 18, 305–306, 462
trip (weapon trait) 283
Trip [one-action](skill action) Knock a creature down. (Athletics) 243
Tumble Through [one-action](skill action) Move through someone’s space. (Acrobatics) 240
turn During a round in an encounter, each creature takes a single turn. A creature
typically uses up to 3 actions during its turn. 13, 468–469
twin (weapon trait) 283
two-hand (weapon trait) 283
unarmed (weapon trait) 283
unarmored defense 274, 275
uncommon (trait) Something of uncommon rarity requires special training or comes
from a particular culture or part of the world. Some character choices give access
to uncommon options, and the GM can choose to allow access for anyone. 13
unconscious (condition) You’re asleep or knocked out. 622–623
death, dying, and unconscious rules 459–461
undead (trait) Once living, these creatures were infused after death with negative
energy and soul-corrupting evil magic. When reduced to 0 Hit Points, an undead
creature is destroyed. Undead creatures are damaged by positive energy, are
healed by negative energy, and don’t benefit from healing effects.
undetected (condition) A creature doesn’t know your precise location. 466–467, 623
uneven ground (terrain) You must Balance or fall when crossing uneven ground. 476
unfriendly (condition) An NPC with this condition doesn’t like you. 623
unique (trait) A rules element with this trait is one-of-a-kind. 13
unlimited A spell with this duration lasts indefinitely. 305
unnoticed (condition) A creature is entirely unaware you’re present. 467, 623
until the next time you make your daily preparations A spell with this duration lasts
until you next prepare, and you can extend it by leaving its spell slot open. 305
Core Rulebook
638
This product is compliant with the Open Game License (OGL) and is suitable for use with the Pathfinder
Roleplaying Game (Second Edition).
Product Identity: The following items are hereby identified as Product Identity, as defined in the Open Game
License version 1.0a, Section 1(e), and are not Open Game Content: All trademarks, registered trademarks,
proper nouns (characters, deities, locations, etc., as well as all adjectives, names, titles, and descriptive terms
derived from proper nouns), Chapter 8 (with the exception of domains), artworks, characters, dialogue, locations,
organizations, plots, storylines, and trade dress. (Elements that have previously been designated as Open Game
Content, or are exclusively derived from previous Open Game Content, or that are in the public domain are not
included in this declaration.)
External Tools: Lines and veils were originally published in Sex & Sorcery, by Ron Edwards, © 2003, Adept
Press. The X-Card by John Stavropoulos (http://tinyurl.com/x-card-rpg) is published under a Creative Commons
Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-SA 3.0) License. They are used here by permission, and are not Open
Game Content released under the Open Game License.
Open Game Content: Except for material designated as Product Identity or External Tools (see above), the game
mechanics of this Paizo game product are Open Game Content, as defined in the Open Game License version
1.0a, Section 1(d). No portion of this work other than the material designated as Open Game Content may be
reproduced in any form without written permission.
Pathfinder Core Rulebook (Second Edition) © 2019, Paizo Inc. All Rights Reserved. Paizo, Paizo Inc., the Paizo golem
logo, Pathfinder, the Pathfinder logo, Pathfinder Society, and Starfinder are registered trademarks of Paizo Inc.;
Pathfinder Adventure Card Game, Pathfinder Adventure Card Society, Pathfinder Adventure Path, Pathfinder
Adventures, Pathfinder Cards, Pathfinder Combat Pad, Pathfinder Flip-Mat, Pathfinder Flip-Tiles, Pathfinder
Roleplaying Game, Pathfinder World Guide, the Pathfinder P logo, and Starfinder Society are trademarks of Paizo Inc.
Printed in China.
OPEN GAME LICENSE Version 1.0a
The following text is the property of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. and is Copyright 2000 Wizards of the
Coast, Inc. (“Wizards”). All Rights Reserved.
1. Definitions: (a) “Contributors” means the copyright and/or trademark owners who have
contributed Open Game Content; (b) “Derivative Material” means copyrighted material including
derivative works and translations (including into other computer languages), potation, modification,
correction, addition, extension, upgrade, improvement, compilation, abridgment or other form in
which an existing work may be recast, transformed or adapted; (c) “Distribute” means to reproduce,
license, rent, lease, sell, broadcast, publicly display, transmit or otherwise distribute; (d) “Open
Game Content” means the game mechanic and includes the methods, procedures, processes and
routines to the extent such content does not embody the Product Identity and is an enhancement
over the prior art and any additional content clearly identified as Open Game Content by the
Contributor, and means any work covered by this License, including translations and derivative
works under copyright law, but specifically excludes Product Identity. (e) “Product Identity” means
product and product line names, logos and identifying marks including trade dress; artifacts,
creatures, characters, stories, storylines, plots, thematic elements, dialogue, incidents, language,
artwork, symbols, designs, depictions, likenesses, formats, poses, concepts, themes and graphic,
photographic and other visual or audio representations; names and descriptions of characters,
spells, enchantments, personalities, teams, personas, likenesses and special abilities; places,
locations, environments, creatures, equipment, magical or supernatural abilities or effects, logos,
symbols, or graphic designs; and any other trademark or registered trademark clearly identified
as Product identity by the owner of the Product Identity, and which specifically excludes the Open
Game Content; (f) “Trademark” means the logos, names, mark, sign, motto, designs that are used
by a Contributor to identify itself or its products or the associated products contributed to the
Open Game License by the Contributor (g) “Use”, “Used” or “Using” means to use, Distribute, copy,
edit, format, modify, translate and otherwise create Derivative Material of Open Game Content.
(h) “You” or “Your” means the licensee in terms of this agreement.
2. The License: This License applies to any Open Game Content that contains a notice indicating that
the Open Game Content may only be Used under and in terms of this License. You must affix such a
notice to any Open Game Content that you Use. No terms may be added to or subtracted from this
License except as described by the License itself. No other terms or conditions may be applied to any
Open Game Content distributed using this License.
3. Offer and Acceptance: By Using the Open Game Content You indicate Your acceptance of the
terms of this License.
4. Grant and Consideration: In consideration for agreeing to use this License, the Contributors grant
You a perpetual, worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive license with the exact terms of this License
to Use, the Open Game Content.
5. Representation of Authority to Contribute: If You are contributing original material as Open Game
Content, You represent that Your Contributions are Your original creation and/or You have sufficient
rights to grant the rights conveyed by this License.
6. Notice of License Copyright: You must update the COPYRIGHT NOTICE portion of this License to
include the exact text of the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any Open Game Content You are copying, modifying
or distributing, and You must add the title, the copyright date, and the copyright holder’s name to the
COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any original Open Game Content you Distribute.
7. Use of Product Identity: You agree not to Use any Product Identity, including as an indication as
to compatibility, except as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with the owner of
each element of that Product Identity. You agree not to indicate compatibility or co-adaptability with
any Trademark or Registered Trademark in conjunction with a work containing Open Game Content
except as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with the owner of such Trademark or
Registered Trademark. The use of any Product Identity in Open Game Content does not constitute a
challenge to the ownership of that Product Identity. The owner of any Product Identity used in Open
Game Content shall retain all rights, title and interest in and to that Product Identity.
8. Identification: If you distribute Open Game Content You must clearly indicate which portions of
the work that you are distributing are Open Game Content.
9. Updating the License: Wizards or its designated Agents may publish updated versions of this
License. You may use any authorized version of this License to copy, modify and distribute any Open
Game Content originally distributed under any version of this License.
10. Copy of this License: You MUST include a copy of this License with every copy of the Open
Game Content You distribute.
11. Use of Contributor Credits: You may not market or advertise the Open Game Content using the
name of any Contributor unless You have written permission from the Contributor to do so.
12. Inability to Comply: If it is impossible for You to comply with any of the terms of this License
with respect to some or all of the Open Game Content due to statute, judicial order, or governmental
regulation then You may not Use any Open Game Material so affected.
13. Termination: This License will terminate automatically if You fail to comply with all terms herein
and fail to cure such breach within 30 days of becoming aware of the breach. All sublicenses shall
survive the termination of this License.
14. Reformation: If any provision of this License is held to be unenforceable, such provision shall be
reformed only to the extent necessary to make it enforceable.
15. COPYRIGHT NOTICE
Open Game License v 1.0a © 2000, Wizards of the Coast, Inc.
System Reference Document © 2000, Wizards of the Coast, Inc.; Authors: Jonathan Tweet, Monte
Cook, and Skip Williams, based on material by E. Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson.
Pathfinder Core Rulebook (Second Edition) © 2019, Paizo Inc.; Designers: Logan Bonner, Jason Bulmahn,
Stephen Radney-MacFarland, and Mark Seifter.
untrained (proficiency rank) The lowest proficiency rank (+0 bonus). 10, 13, 444
usage An indication of how an item must be worn, held, or otherwise used. 535
vague sense A sense that can detect an unnoticed creature but not determine its
position, such as a human’s sense of smell. 465
verbal (spell component) 303
versatile (weapon trait) 283
virulent (trait) Afflictions with the virulent trait are harder to remove. You must
succeed at two consecutive saves to reduce a virulent affliction’s stage by 1. A
critical success reduces a virulent affliction’s stage by only 1 instead of by 2.
visual (trait) A visual effect can affect only creatures that can see it. This applies only
to visible parts of the effect, as determined by the GM.
volley (weapon trait) 283
wall 306, 515
wand (trait) A wand contains a single spell which you can cast once per day. 597–598
watches 499–500
water (trait) Effects with the water trait either manipulate or conjure water. Those
that manipulate water have no effect in an area without water. Creatures with
this trait consist primarily of water or have a magical connection to the element.
weakness Increases damage you take of a certain type. 453
wealth A character’s wealth by level. 508–511
weapon 278–286
magical and special weapons 599–602
runes 580–585
wielding 272
weather 497, 517–518
welcoming environment 8, 485–486
Will A saving throw used to resist effects targeting the mind and personality. Will
modifier = Wis modifier + proficiency bonus + other bonuses + penalties. 13, 448–449
Wisdom (Wis) This ability score measures your awareness and intuition. 19
wizard (class) 202–213
arcane spell list 307–309
multiclass archetype 231
school spells 406–407
wizard (trait)  This indicates abilities from the wizard class.
wounded (condition) You’ve returned from the brink of death but remain at risk. 623
XP (Experience Points) See also Experience Points. 8, 507–508
PAIZO INC.
Creative Directors • James Jacobs, Robert G. McCreary, and Sarah E. Robinson
Director of Game Design • Jason Bulmahn
Managing Developers • Adam Daigle and Amanda Hamon
Organized Play Lead Developer • John Compton
Developers • Eleanor Ferron, Jason Keeley, Luis Loza, Ron Lundeen, Joe Pasini,
Patrick Renie, Michael Sayre, Chris S. Sims, and Linda Zayas-Palmer
Starfinder Design Lead • Owen K.C. Stephens
Starfinder Society Developer • Thurston Hillman
Senior Designer • Stephen Radney-MacFarland
Designers • Logan Bonner and Mark Seifter
Managing Editor • Judy Bauer
Senior Editor • Christopher Paul Carey
Editors • James Case, Leo Glass, Lyz Liddell, Adrian Ng, Lacy Pellazar, and Jason Tondro
Art Director • Sonja Morris
Senior Graphic Designers • Emily Crowell and Adam Vick
Production Artist • Tony Barnett
Franchise Manager • Mark Moreland
Project Manager • Gabriel Waluconis
Paizo CEO • Lisa Stevens
Chief Creative Officer • Erik Mona
Chief Financial Officer • John Parrish
Chief Operations Officer • Jeffrey Alvarez
Chief Technical Officer • Vic Wertz
Director of Sales • Pierce Watters
Sales Associate • Cosmo Eisele
Vice President of Marketing & Licensing • Jim Butler
Marketing Manager • Dan Tharp
Licensing Manager • Glenn Elliott
Public Relations Manager • Aaron Shanks
Customer Service & Community Manager • Sara Marie
Operations Manager • Will Chase
Organized Play Manager • Tonya Woldridge
Human Resources Generalist • Angi Hodgson
Accountant • Christopher Caldwell
Data Entry Clerk • B. Scott Keim
Director of Technology • Raimi Kong
Web Production Manager • Chris Lambertz
Senior Software Developer • Gary Teter
Webstore Coordinator • Rick Kunz
Customer Service Team • Katina Davis, Virginia Jordan, Samantha Phelan, and
Diego Valdez
Warehouse Team • Laura Wilkes Carey, Mika Hawkins, Heather Payne, Jeff Strand, and
Kevin Underwood
Website Team • Brian Bauman, Robert Brandenburg, Whitney Chatterjee, Erik Keith,
Josh Thornton, and Andrew White
HARDCOVER $36.99
THIS COMPREHENSIVE HARDCOVER OVERVIEW OF THE WORLD OF PATHFINDER PROVIDES EVERYTHING YOU NEED TO KNOW
FOR A LIFETIME OF ADVENTURE IN THE AGE OF LOST OMENS. THE GOD OF HUMANITY IS DEAD AND PROPHECY IS BROKEN,
LEAVING HEROES JUST LIKE YOU TO CARVE THEIR OWN DESTINIES OUT OF AN UNCERTAIN FUTURE!
Lost Omens
World Guide
Second Edition
© 2019, Paizo Inc. Paizo, Paizo Inc., the Paizo golem logo, Path	 nder, and the Path	 nder logo are registered trademarks of Paizo Inc.;
the Path	 nder P logo, Path	 nder Adventure Path, Path	 nder Roleplaying Game, and Path	 nder World Guide are trademarks of Paizo Inc. paizo.com/pathfi nder

MORE THAN 400 OF FANTASY’S FIERCEST FOES FILL THIS GIANT COMPENDIUM OF THE MOST POPULAR CREATURES IN THE
PATHFINDER RPG! FROM FAMILIAR ENEMIES LIKE ORCS AND DRAGONS TO NEW BEASTS LIKE THE NIGHTMARISH NILITH,
THIS TOME IS CRAWLING WITH CREATURES PERFECT FOR YOUR PATHFINDER ADVENTURES!
Bestiary
HARDCOVER $49.99 and Deluxe HARDCOVER $69.99
paizo.com/pathfi nder © 2019, Paizo Inc. Paizo, Paizo Inc., the Paizo golem logo, Path	 nder, and the Path	 nder logo are registered trademarks of Paizo Inc.;
the Path	 nder P logo, Path	 nder Adventure Path, Path	 nder Roleplaying Game, and Path	 nder World Guide are trademarks of Paizo Inc.
Second Edition

Rulebook
Advance Your Game
This comprehensive guide to the Pathfinder roleplaying game provides
everything you need to set out into a world of limitless fantasy adventure!
Choose from ancestries like elf, human, and goblin and classes like alchemist,
fighter, and sorcerer to create a hero of your own design, destined to become
a legend! The new Pathfinder rules are easier to learn and faster to play,
and they offer deeper customization than ever before!
This indispensable volume contains the core rules for players and
Game Masters, and is your first step on a heroic new journey!
paizo.com/pathfinder Printed in China. 